 
 
 
 
Banking, Insurance and Life Insurance (prudential 
standard) determination No. 3 of 2016  
Prudential Standard 3PS 222 Intra-group Transactions and 
Exposures 
Banking Act 1959 
Insurance Act 1973 
Life Insurance Act 1995 
 
I, Wayne Byres, delegate of APRA: 
 
(a) 
under subsection 11AF(1) of the Banking Act 1959 DETERMINE Prudential 
Standard 3PS 222 Intra-group Transactions and Exposures in the form set out 
in the Schedule, to the extent that it applies to all ADIs and authorised banking 
NOHCs;  
 
(b) 
under subsection 32(1) of the Insurance Act 1973 DETERMINE Prudential 
Standard 3PS 222 Intra-group Transactions and Exposures in the form set out 
in the Schedule, to the extent that it applies to all general insurers, authorised 
insurance NOHCs, and subsidiaries of general insurers and authorised insurance 
NOHCs; and 
 
(c) 
under subsection 230A(1) of the Life Insurance Act 1995 DETERMINE 
Prudential Standard 3PS 222 Intra-group Transactions and Exposures in the 
form set out in the Schedule, to the extent that it applies to all life companies, 
friendly societies, registered life NOHCs, and subsidiaries of life companies and 
registered life NOHCs.   
 
This instrument commences on 1 July 2017. 
 
Dated: 8 September 2016 
 
[Signed] 
 
Wayne Byres 
Chairman 
Authorised Version F2016L01433 registered 14/09/2016
 
 
 
Interpretation 
In this Determination: 
ADI has the meaning given in section 5 of the Banking Act 1959. 
APRA means the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority. 
authorised banking NOHC has the meaning given to the expression authorised 
NOHC in section 5 of the Banking Act 1959. 
authorised insurance NOHC has the meaning given to the expression authorised 
NOHC in subsection 3(1) of the Insurance Act 1973. 
friendly society has the meaning given in section 16C of the Life Insurance Act 1995. 
general insurer has the meaning given in section 11 of the Insurance Act 1973. 
life company has the meaning given in the Schedule to the Life Insurance Act 1995. 
registered life NOHC has the meaning given to the expression registered NOHC in 
the Schedule to the Life Insurance Act 1995. 
 
Schedule  
 
Prudential Standard 3PS 222 Intra-group Transactions and Exposures comprises the 
5 pages commencing on the following page.  
 
Authorised Version F2016L01433 registered 14/09/2016
 
July 2017 
 
3PS 222 - 1 
 
Prudential Standard 3PS 222   
Intra-Group Transactions and Exposures   
Objectives and key requirements of this Prudential 
Standard 
This Prudential Standard requires a Level 3 Head to ensure that associations and 
dealings within the Level 3 group do not expose prudentially regulated institutions 
within the group to excessive risk. 
The ultimate responsibility for the intra-group transactions and exposures policy of a 
Level 3 group rests with the Board of its Level 3 Head. 
The key requirements of this Prudential Standard are that a Level 3 Head must: 
 
have a policy for the Level 3 group that deals with the measurement, 
management and monitoring of, and reporting on, intra-group transactions and 
exposures between members of the group; 
 
develop and implement effective systems and processes to manage, monitor and 
report on intra-group transactions and exposures; and 
 
meet minimum requirements with respect to dealings between institutions in the 
Level 3 group and certain related matters. 
The requirements in this Prudential Standard are in addition to the obligations 
imposed on prudentially regulated institutions under other Prudential Standards. 
Authorised Version F2016L01433 registered 14/09/2016
 
July 2017 
 
3PS 222 - 2 
Authority 
1. 
This Prudential Standard is made under: 
(a) 
section 11AF of the Banking Act 1959 (Banking Act); 
(b) 
section 32 of the Insurance Act 1973 (Insurance Act); and 
(c) 
section 230A of the Life Insurance Act 1995 (Life Insurance Act). 
Application 
2. 
This Prudential Standard applies to each Level 3 Head. 
3. 
This Prudential Standard commences on 1 July 2017. 
Interpretation 
4. 
Terms that are defined in Prudential Standard 3PS 001 Definitions appear in 
bold the first time they are used in this Prudential Standard. 
5. 
Where this Prudential Standard provides for APRA to exercise a power or 
discretion, this power or discretion is to be exercised in writing. 
Intra-group transactions and exposures 
6. 
For the purposes of this Prudential Standard, an intra-group transaction and 
exposure (ITE) is the total exposure, including on- and off-balance sheet 
exposures, of a Level 3 institution to another Level 3 institution within the 
same Level 3 group. 
7. 
A Level 3 Head must have an ‘ITE policy’ that addresses all material risks 
arising in relation to ITEs associated with operations undertaken by Level 3 
institutions in the Level 3 group. The policy must include systems and 
procedures to identify, measure, monitor, evaluate, report and control or 
mitigate all material risks arising from ITEs between Level 3 institutions in the 
group. 
8. 
A Level 3 Head must conduct forward-looking scenario analysis and stress 
testing of the Level 3 group’s material ITEs. The analysis must assess the 
impact of changes in market conditions and key risk factors on these ITEs, and 
how these changes impact the group’s risk profile, capital strength and earnings. 
9. 
The management of ITEs must be a part of a Level 3 group’s risk management 
framework.1 
The role of the Board of a Level 3 Head 
10. 
The Board of a Level 3 Head must: 
(a) 
approve the ITE policy for the Level 3 group; 
                                                 
1  
Refer to Prudential Standard CPS 220 Risk Management (CPS 220). 
Authorised Version F2016L01433 registered 14/09/2016
 
July 2017 
 
3PS 222 - 3 
(b) 
ensure that adequate systems and controls are in place to identify, 
measure, manage, monitor and report on material ITEs in the Level 3 
group in a timely manner and that those systems and controls are 
documented; 
(c) 
engage in oversight, which may be via a board committee, of the approach 
to the identification, measurement, management and monitoring of ITEs 
and compliance with the ITE policy, which includes receiving regular 
reviews of which ITEs are deemed to be material to the operations of the 
Level 3 group; and 
(d) 
review the ITE policy at least annually, to ensure that this policy remains 
adequate and appropriate for identifying, measuring, managing and 
monitoring material risks in relation to ITEs. 
11. 
If a prudentially regulated institution in the Level 3 group proposes to accept 
terms and conditions, in dealing with Level 3 institutions in the group, that are 
not consistent with terms and conditions that would be negotiated on an arms-
length basis in such a dealing, those terms and conditions must first be approved 
by the Board of the Level 3 Head with justification fully and clearly 
documented. 
The ITE policy 
12. 
The ITE policy for a Level 3 group must: 
(a) 
be conceptually sound, consistently implemented, transparent and be 
subject to independent review; 
(b) 
capture all material ITEs; 
(c) 
include limits on acceptable levels of ITEs for a Level 3 institution in the 
Level 3 group having regard to: 
(i) 
the Level 3 institution’s Board-approved limits on exposures to 
unrelated institutions of broadly equivalent credit status; and 
(ii) 
the potential impact on the Level 3 group’s capital and liquidity 
positions, as well as the institution’s ability to continue operating, as 
a result of a failure of any other institution in the group; and 
(d) 
include a description of the procedures for identifying, reviewing, 
controlling and reporting material ITEs within the Level 3 group. This 
must include: 
(i) 
a clear statement of the respective responsibilities and compliance 
obligations on the Board of the Level 3 Head, its board committees 
and senior management of the Level 3 group in relation to the 
monitoring and management of material ITEs; 
(ii) 
escalation procedures for ITEs that facilitate responses to identified 
policy breaches between formal reporting cycles; 
Authorised Version F2016L01433 registered 14/09/2016
 
July 2017 
 
3PS 222 - 4 
(iii) the circumstances in which ITE limits may be exceeded and the 
authority required for approving such excesses; 
(iv) procedures for resolving any conflict of interest arising in relation to 
ITEs; 
(v) 
procedures for the participation of prudentially regulated institutions 
in Level 3 group-wide operations; 
(vi) processes to ensure the transparency of dealings with entities 
external to the Level 3 group that are associated with ITEs; 
(vii) thresholds and procedures for reporting material changes to the 
Board of the Level 3 Head, in both formal reporting cycles and 
outside formal reporting cycles; and 
(viii) a timetable for a regular review of the reports by the Board of the 
Level 3 Head. 
Participation in group-wide operations 
13. 
A Level 3 Head must establish policies and procedures to address risks posed to 
the group from the participation of any prudentially regulated institution in 
Level 3 group-wide operations including, but not limited to, sharing premises 
with other Level 3 institutions, centralising back-office functions or outsourcing 
services to other Level 3 institutions. 
14. 
Where a prudentially regulated institution participates in Level 3 group-wide 
activities, a Level 3 Head must: 
(a) 
consider the risks posed to that institution on a standalone basis as a result 
of its participation in such activities; 
(b) 
be satisfied that these ITEs are appropriately addressed by the Level 3 
group’s risk management policies; 
(c) 
ensure dealings with other parties arising from participation in group-wide 
operations are appropriately documented in written service agreements2; 
(d) 
facilitate APRA being able to obtain information required for the 
supervision of either individual prudentially regulated institutions or the 
Level 3 group as a whole; and 
(e) 
ensure that there is a clear obligation under the written arrangements for 
any service provider to comply with any direction given by APRA in 
relation to the operations of any prudentially regulated institution within 
the Level 3 group. 
                                                 
2  
Outsourcing of material business activities to a related entity must satisfy the prudential 
requirements set out in Prudential Standard CPS 231 Outsourcing. 
Authorised Version F2016L01433 registered 14/09/2016
 
July 2017 
 
3PS 222 - 5 
Internal reporting systems 
15. 
A Level 3 Head’s management information systems must incorporate reporting 
systems in relation to ITEs across the Level 3 group.3 
16. 
Reports on material ITEs must be provided to APRA on request. 
Limits and approvals 
17. 
Where, in APRA’s view, the Level 3 group is exposed to a significant level of 
ITEs, APRA may require a Level 3 Head to limit or reduce the Level 3 group’s 
level of ITEs. APRA may also determine how a Level 3 Head must calculate the 
ITEs. In determining any requirement to limit or reduce the Level 3 group’s 
level of ITEs, or how a Level 3 Head must calculate an ITE, APRA may take 
account of the following factors: 
(a) 
whether the Level 3 group has been acting in a manner that is consistent 
with the ITE policy; 
(b) 
the characteristics of ITEs, including their number, size and nature; 
(c) 
the characteristics of the Level 3 group, including the nature of its 
business and the experience of its management; and 
(d) 
other relevant factors to be considered on a case-by-case basis. 
Notification requirements 
18. 
A Level 3 Head must notify APRA as soon as practicable, and no more than 10 
business days, after it becomes aware: 
(a) 
of a breach of the limits in the ITE policy; 
(b) 
of any significant breach of, or material deviation from, the ITE policy; or 
(c) 
that the ITE policy did not adequately address a material risk, 
and advise of remedial actions taken, or planned to be taken, to deal with the 
issue. 
19. 
A Level 3 Head must submit to APRA a copy of its ITE policy as soon as 
practicable, and no more than 10 business days, after Board approval. 
Adjustments and exclusions 
20. 
APRA may adjust or exclude a specific requirement in this Prudential Standard 
in relation to the Level 3 Head.4 
                                                 
3  
Refer to CPS 220. 
4  
Refer to subsection 11AF(2) of the Banking Act, subsection 32(3D) of the Insurance Act and 
subsection 230A(4) of the Life Insurance Act. 
Authorised Version F2016L01433 registered 14/09/2016


--- End of file: 3PS 222 Intra-group Transactions and Exposures.txt ---

 
APG 223 Residential Mortgage Lending 
December 2022 
 
PRUDENTIAL PRACTICE 
GUIDE 
 
 
PRUDENTIAL 
PRACTICE GUIDE 
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
2 
 
 
Disclaimer and Copyright 
While APRA endeavours to ensure the quality of this publication, it does not accept any 
responsibility for the accuracy, completeness or currency of the material included in this 
publication and will not be liable for any loss or damage arising out of any use of, or 
reliance on, this publication. 
© Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) 
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Australia Licence 
(CCBY 3.0). This licence allows you to copy, distribute and adapt this work, provided you 
attribute the work and do not suggest that APRA endorses you or your work. To view a full 
copy of the terms of this licence, visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/au/  
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
3 
Contents 
About this guide 
4 
Background 
5 
Risk management framework 
6 
Loan origination 
12 
Specific loan types 
19 
Security valuation 
21 
Hardship loans and collections 
25 
Stress testing 
27 
Lenders mortgage insurance 
29 
Glossary 
30 
 
 
 
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
4 
About this guide 
Prudential practice guides (PPGs) provide guidance on APRA’s view of sound practice in 
particular areas. PPGs frequently discuss statutory requirements from legislation, 
regulations or APRA’s prudential standards, but do not themselves create enforceable 
requirements. PPGs target areas where APRA continues to identify weaknesses as part of 
its ongoing supervisory activities, and do not seek to provide an all-encompassing 
framework, or to replace or endorse existing industry standards and guidelines. 
This PPG aims to outline prudent practices in the management of risks arising from lending 
secured by mortgages over residential properties, including owner-occupied and investment 
properties. It applies to authorised deposit-taking institutions (ADIs) as well as to other 
APRA-regulated institutions that may have exposures to residential mortgages. It should be 
read in conjunction with prudential standards for ADIs, including: 
• 
Prudential Standard APS 220 Credit Risk Management (APS 220);  
• 
Prudential Standard CPS 220 Risk Management (CPS 220);  
• 
Prudential Practice Guide CPG 220 Risk Management (CPG 220); and 
• 
Prudential Standard CPS 510 Governance (CPS 510). 
Subject to meeting APRA’s prudential requirements, and legislative and regulatory 
requirements governing consumer lending by ADIs and third parties acting on their behalf, 
an APRA-regulated institution has the flexibility to manage residential mortgage lending in a 
manner that is best suited to achieving its business objectives. Not all of the practices 
outlined in this PPG will be relevant for every institution and some aspects may vary 
depending upon the size, complexity and risk profile of the institution.  
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
5 
Background 
 Lending secured by mortgages over residential property (residential mortgage lending) 
constitutes the largest credit exposure in the Australian banking system, and for many 
authorised deposit-taking institutions (ADIs) constitutes over half their total credit 
exposures. This concentration of exposure warrants ADIs paying particular attention to 
residential mortgage lending practices. 
 This prudential practice guide (PPG) summarises prudent lending practices in 
residential mortgage lending in Australia, including the need to address credit risk 
within the ADI’s risk management framework, sound loan origination criteria, 
appropriate security valuation practices, the management of hardship loans and a robust 
stress-testing framework. In developing this PPG, APRA has had regard to the Financial 
Stability Board’s (FSB) Principles for Sound Residential Mortgage Underwriting Practices
1 
(FSB principles), which sets out minimum underwriting (loan origination) standards that 
the FSB encourages supervisors to implement. Although the exact details may differ 
somewhat to reflect local conditions, APRA would expect a prudent ADI undertaking 
residential mortgage lending outside of Australia to apply lending standards and risk 
management practices that are similarly conservative to those outlined in this PPG. 
 
1 www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications/r_120418.pdf 
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
6 
Risk management framework 
APRA’s expectations of an ADI Board for residential mortgage 
lending 
 Where residential mortgage lending forms a material proportion of an ADI’s lending 
portfolio and therefore a risk that may have a material impact on the ADI, APRA expects 
that the Board would take reasonable steps to satisfy itself as to the level of risk in the 
ADI’s residential mortgage lending portfolio and the effectiveness of its risk 
management framework. This would, at the very least, include: 
a) 
specifically addressing residential mortgage lending in the ADI’s risk appetite, risk 
management strategy and business plans; 
b) 
seeking assurances from senior management that the approved risk appetite is 
communicated to relevant persons involved in residential mortgage lending and is 
appropriately reflected in the ADI’s policies and procedures; and 
c) 
seeking assurances from senior management that there is a robust management 
information system in place that: 
i) 
tracks material risks against risk appetite; 
ii) 
provides periodic reporting on compliance with policies and procedures, 
reasons for significant breaches or material deviations and updates on actions 
being taken to rectify breaches or deviations; and 
iii) provides accurate, timely and relevant information on the performance and risk 
profile of the residential mortgage lending portfolio. 
Risk appetite including residential mortgage lending 
 The overarching risk appetite statement required under CPS 220 would typically include 
an expression of the level of credit risk an ADI is willing to accept. Such a statement 
would be expected to adopt a forward-looking view of the ADI’s credit risk profile and 
align with its business plan and risk management strategy.  
 
Consistent with Prudential Standard CPS 220 Risk Management (CPS 220), where 
residential mortgage lending forms a material proportion of an ADI’s lending portfolio 
and therefore represents a risk that may have a material impact on the ADI, it would be 
prudent for the Board of directors (the Board) and senior management to specifically 
address residential mortgage lending in its risk management framework, in particular in 
the risk appetite statement, risk management strategy and business plans. 
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
7 
 Where residential mortgage lending forms a material proportion of an ADI’s lending 
portfolio and therefore represents a risk that may have a material impact on the ADI, the 
accepted level of credit risk would be expected to specifically address the risk in the 
residential mortgage portfolio. Further, in order to assist senior management and 
lending staff to operate within the accepted level of credit risk, quantifiable risk limits 
would be set for various aspects of the residential mortgage portfolio. When setting risk 
limits for the residential mortgage portfolio, a prudent ADI would consider the following 
areas: 
a) 
loans with differing risk profiles (e.g. interest-only loans, owner-occupied, 
investment property, reverse mortgages, home equity lines-of-credit (HELOCs), 
foreign currency loans and loans with non-standard/alternative documentation); 
b) 
loans originated through various channels (e.g. mobile lenders, brokers, branches 
and online); 
c) 
geographic concentrations; 
d) 
serviceability criteria (e.g. limits on loan size relative to income, (stressed) 
mortgage repayments to income, net income surplus and other debt servicing 
measures);  
e) 
loan-to-valuation ratios (LVRs), including limits on high LVR loans for new 
originations and for the overall portfolio; 
f) 
use of lenders mortgage insurance (LMI) and associated concentration risks; 
g) 
special circumstance loans, such as reliance on guarantors, loans to retired or 
soon-to–be-retired persons, loans to non-residents, loans with non-typical features 
such as trusts or self-managed superannuation funds (SMSFs); 
h) 
frequency and types of overrides to lending policies, guidelines and loan origination 
standards; 
i) 
maximum expected or tolerable portfolio default, arrears and write-off rates; and 
j) 
non-lending losses such as operational breakdowns or adverse reputational events 
related to consumer lending practices. 
 Good practice would be for the risk management framework to clearly specify whether 
particular risk limits are ‘hard’ limits, where any breach is escalated for action as soon 
as practicable, or ‘soft’ limits, where occasional or temporary breaches are tolerated. 
 In keeping with good practice, an ADI would balance the need to regularly review its risk 
appetite and risk limits in relation to residential mortgage lending, with the need to avoid 
too-frequent and disruptive change. APRA would be concerned if risk limits were 
frequently redefined in a manner that leads to obscured limit breaches or to greater 
risk-taking outside the ADI’s overall risk appetite. This could include, for example, 
changing between portfolio and origination limit measures, or between including and 
excluding capitalised LMI premiums in risk limits. 
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
8 
Oversight and review 
 Consistent with CPS 220, an ADI would have policies and procedures for identifying, 
measuring, monitoring and controlling material risks in the residential mortgage 
lending portfolio.  
 Typically, senior management is responsible for monitoring compliance with material 
policies, procedures and risk limits and reporting material breaches or overrides to the 
Board. Further, where risk limits are routinely breached or policies and procedures 
overridden, senior management and the Board could consider whether this is indicative 
of a less prudent lending culture than that reflected in its risk appetite and what steps 
could be necessary to remedy any identified deficiency. 
 In order to establish robust oversight, the Board and senior management would receive 
regular, concise and meaningful assessment of actual risks relative to the ADI’s risk 
appetite and of the operation and effectiveness of internal controls. The information 
would be provided in a timely manner to facilitate early corrective action. 
 A prudent ADI would have controls in relation to its residential mortgage portfolio that 
have appropriate regard to the level of risk within the portfolio. Portfolios that have 
higher inherent risk, for example where the portfolio is usually operating at the higher 
end of risk limits, would typically be accompanied by stronger controls, including: 
a) 
increased senior management oversight; 
b) 
increased monitoring and more granular reporting to the Board and senior 
management; 
c) 
increased level and frequency of reviews by the risk management function; 
d) 
increased level of internal audit; 
e) 
stronger default management and collection capabilities; and 
f) 
provisioning and capital levels reflective of the risk of the portfolio. 
 Consistent with CPS 220, the aspects of the risk management framework that apply to 
the residential mortgage lending portfolio would be subject to a comprehensive review 
by an operationally independent and competent person at least every three years. The 
person would report the results of reviews to the Board, providing an independent and 
objective evaluation of the appropriateness, adequacy and effectiveness of the risk 
management framework with respect to the portfolio. 
 Failure to meet responsible lending conduct obligations, such as the requirement to 
make reasonable inquiries about the borrower’s requirements and objectives, or failure 
to document these enquiries, can expose an ADI to potentially significant risks. A 
prudent ADI would conduct a periodic assessment of compliance with responsible 
lending conduct obligations to ensure it does not expose itself to significant financial 
loss. 
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
9 
Management information systems 
 It would be prudent for an ADI with material exposure to residential mortgage lending to 
invest in management information systems that allow for appropriate assessment of 
residential mortgage lending risk exposures. Such a system would typically capture a 
range of risk metrics related to individual loans at the point of application and 
throughout the life of the loan.
2  
 Further, a prudent ADI would have analytical capability that allows it to monitor, analyse 
and report key metrics against risk appetite and to assess the residential mortgage 
portfolio at both the individual loan level and portfolio level. The data, when collectively 
presented to the Board and senior management, would enable an accurate and 
meaningful assessment of the residential mortgage portfolio. A history of low defaults 
does not justify under-investment in management information systems. 
 A robust management information system would be able to provide good quality 
information on residential mortgage lending risks. This would typically include: 
a) 
the composition and quality of the residential mortgage lending portfolio, e.g. by 
type of customer (first home buyer, owner-occupied, investment etc), product line, 
distribution channel, loan vintage, geographic concentration, LVR bands at 
origination, loans on the watch list and impaired;  
b) 
portfolio performance reporting, including trend analysis, peer comparisons where 
possible, other risk-adjusted profitability and economic capital measures and 
results from stress tests; 
c) 
compliance against risk limits and trigger levels at which action is required; 
d) 
reports on broker relationships and performance;  
e) 
exception reporting including overrides, key drivers for overrides and delinquency 
performance for loans approved by override;  
f) 
reports on loan breaches and other issues arising from annual reviews; 
g) 
prepayment rates and mortgage prepayment buffers; 
h) 
serviceability buffers including trends, performance, recent changes to buffers and 
adjustments and rationale for changes; 
i) 
missed payments, hardship concessions and restructurings, cure rates and 30-, 60- 
and 90-days arrears levels across, for example, different segments of the portfolio, 
loan vintage, geographic region, borrower type, distribution channel and product 
type; 
 
2 Refer to Prudential Practice Guide CPG 235 Managing Data Risk (CPG 235) for guidance on managing data risk. 
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
10 
j) 
changes to valuation methodologies, types and location of collateral held and 
analysis relating to any current or expected changes in collateral values;  
k) 
findings from valuer reviews or other hindsight reviews undertaken by the ADI; 
l) 
reporting against key metrics to measure collections performance; 
m) tracking of loans insured by LMI providers, including claims made and adverse 
findings by such providers; 
n) 
provisioning trends and write-offs; 
o) 
internal and external audit findings and tracking of unresolved issues and closure;  
p) 
issues of contention with third-parties including service providers, valuation firms, 
etc; and 
q) 
risk drivers and other components that form part of scorecard or models used for 
loan origination as well as risk indicators for new lending. 
Remuneration 
 Prudential Standard CPS 510 Governance (CPS 510) requires the Board-approved ADI 
remuneration policy to be aligned with prudent risk-taking. CPS 510 requires the 
remuneration policy to apply to responsible persons, risk and financial control personnel 
and all other persons whose activities may affect the financial soundness of the 
regulated institution.
3  Where the residential mortgage lending portfolio is material, a 
prudent ADI would apply its remuneration policy to the persons involved in residential 
mortgage lending. This would include remuneration of third parties, particularly 
mortgage broker firms, when they are responsible for origination of a material 
proportion of the residential mortgage loan portfolio. For the avoidance of doubt, the ADI 
remuneration policy is intended to capture an ADI’s engagement with its brokers, not 
how a broking firm pays its staff. Alternatively, the ADI may address such remuneration 
arrangements within its risk management framework with appropriate senior 
management or Board oversight. 
 In Australia, it is standard market practice to pay brokers either an upfront commission 
or a trailing commission, or both. A prudent approach to the use of third parties for 
residential mortgage lending would include appropriate measures to ensure that 
commission-based compensation does not create adverse incentives. Such measures 
would include consideration of appropriate clawback provisions and ensure that 
incentive arrangements discourage conflicts of interests and inappropriate behaviour. 
 Regardless of the commission structure, a prudent ADI would recognise the incentives 
and potential risks inherent in its broker remuneration structure. It would have in place 
appropriate monitoring and controls to guard against incentives to pursue loans with 
 
3 Refer to paragraph 57 of CPS 510. 
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
11 
inadequate or false verification, marginal serviceability, excessive leverage or unsuitable 
terms for a borrower. 
 A prudent ADI relying on brokers to originate a material proportion of its residential 
mortgage portfolio would closely monitor performance at the broker firm or, where 
relevant, the individual broker level. Where loans originated by a broker or broker firm 
have unexpectedly elevated levels of loan defaults, or materially deficient loan 
documentation and processing, a prudent ADI would take measures to address such 
matters including restricting or terminating such relationships. 
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
12 
Loan origination 
 Residential mortgage lending risks change over time. A prudent ADI would have regard 
to the impact on the portfolio of varying conditions, such as low or recently changed 
interest rates, rapid house price increases or decreases and large changes in housing 
supply or demand in particular markets. Changes to consumer credit conduct 
obligations, including responsible lending obligations, also need to be considered. 
 When an ADI is increasing its residential mortgage lending rapidly or at a rate materially 
faster than its competitors, either across the portfolio or in particular segments or 
geographical areas, a prudent Board would seek explanation as to why this is the case. 
Rapid relative growth could be due to an unintended deterioration in the ADI’s loan 
origination practices, in which case APRA expects that an ADI’s risk management 
framework would facilitate rapid and effective measures to mitigate any consequences. 
 ADIs typically use various direct and indirect origination channels to source mortgage 
loans, for example, branches, telephone, brokers and online. A prudent ADI would 
recognise and address the risks arising from different origination channels in its risk 
management framework. An ADI would typically exercise a higher level of diligence 
when the credit approval decision is made distant from the location of the borrower or 
the underlying collateral. A degree of local knowledge (e.g. local house price levels, 
levels of available stock, local employment and competition issues) by assessors can be 
useful. In APRA’s experience, ADIs that extend loans away from their core geographic 
market tend to be more reliant on third-party originators. If not closely monitored, this 
reliance can potentially lead to additional risk and give rise to higher levels of exposure 
that may be outside an ADI’s risk appetite. 
 Where there are material changes to distribution channels, a robust risk management 
framework would include the need to assess changes to an ADI’s risk profile and 
address this risk. 
Serviceability assessments 
 Accurately assessing a borrower’s ability to service and ultimately to repay a loan 
without undue hardship, including under periods of economic stress, is an inherent 
component of sound credit risk management, particularly for residential mortgage 
lending. An ADI’s serviceability tests are used to determine whether the borrower can 
afford the ongoing servicing and repayment costs of the loan for which they have applied. 
APRA expects an ADI to undertake a new serviceability assessment whenever there are 
material changes to the current or originally approved loan conditions. Such changes 
Sound loan origination practices are necessary for prudent residential mortgage lending 
whether the loans are originated directly by an ADI or are sourced from other distribution 
channels. As well as considering individual loans, effective risk management requires a 
portfolio view of originations.  
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
13 
would include a change of repayment basis from principal and interest to interest-only, 
or the extension of an existing interest-only period. A change from a fixed-rate basis to a 
floating-rate basis (or vice versa), or an extension in the tenor of the loan are other 
examples of material changes. A new serviceability assessment would be appropriate for 
any change that increases the total repayments over the life of the loan, even when 
immediate periodic repayments are lower than under the previous loan conditions.  
 A robust risk management framework would have clearly stated policies and procedures 
for evaluating loan serviceability. Material policies and procedures would be reviewed at 
least annually and updated where required to align with the changing external 
environment and any resultant changes to the risk appetite. APRA expects that any 
material changes to an ADI’s serviceability policy would be analysed and the potential 
impact on the risk profile of new loans written would be reported to appropriate risk 
governance forums. Reference to competitors’ policies as the primary justification for 
policy changes would be seen by APRA as indicative of weak risk governance. 
 Loan serviceability policies would include a set of consistent serviceability criteria across 
all mortgage products. A single set of serviceability criteria would promote consistency 
by applying the same buffers, serviceability calculation and override framework across 
different products offered by an ADI. Where an ADI uses different serviceability criteria 
for different products or across different ‘brands’, APRA expects the ADI to be able to 
articulate and be aware of commercial and other reasons for these differences, and any 
implications for the ADI’s risk profile and risk appetite. 
 ADIs generally use some form of net income surplus (NIS) model to make an 
assessment as to whether the borrower can service a particular loan, based on the 
nature of the borrower’s income and expenses. 
 Good practice would ensure that the borrower retains a reasonable income buffer above 
expenses to account for unexpected changes in income or expenses as well as for 
savings purposes. It would be prudent for ADIs to monitor the level of, and trends for, 
lending to borrowers with minimal income buffers. High or increasing levels of marginal 
borrowers may indicate elevated serviceability risk. 
 A sound serviceability assessment model applied to a residential mortgage borrower 
would include consideration of any existing and ongoing debt commitments (both 
secured and unsecured), interest rates and outstanding principal on such debt and any 
evidence of delinquency. In addition, good practice is that ongoing serviceability would 
not rely on longer-term access to ‘honeymoon’ or discounted introductory rates. 
 A prudent ADI would include various buffers and adjustments in its serviceability 
assessment model to reflect potential increases in mortgage interest rates, increases in 
a borrower’s living expenses and decreases in a borrower’s income, particularly for less 
stable income sources. APRA’s expectation is that the combination of buffers and other 
adjustments in these models would seek to ensure that the portfolio, in aggregate, 
would be able to absorb substantial stress, such as in an economic downturn or rising 
interest rate environment, without producing unexpectedly high loan default losses for 
the lender.  
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
14 
 Under Attachment C of Prudential Standard APS 220 Credit Risk Management, ADI’s must 
apply a buffer over a loan’s interest rate of at least 3.0 per cent, unless determined 
otherwise by APRA. The buffer would be applied to the interest rate on the loan to be 
paid by the borrower, ignoring any discounted introductory or honeymoon rates offered 
for a limited period at origination of the loan. This approach would seek to ensure that 
potential increases in interest rates do not adversely impact on a borrower’s capacity to 
repay a loan. The buffer would reflect the potential for interest rates to change over 
several years.  
  In addition, a prudent ADI would use the buffer in conjunction with an interest rate floor, 
to ensure that the buffer used is adequate when the ADI is operating in a low interest 
rate environment.  
 APRA expects ADIs to fully apply buffers and floor rates to both a borrower’s new and 
existing debt commitments. APRA expects ADIs to make sufficient enquiries on existing 
debt commitments, including consideration of the current interest rate, remaining term, 
outstanding balance and amount available for redraw of the existing loan facility, as well 
as any evidence of delinquency. ADIs using a proxy to estimate the application of buffers 
and floor rates to the servicing cost of existing debt commitments would, to be prudent, 
ensure that such a proxy is sufficiently conservative in a range of situations, updating the 
methodology to reflect prevailing interest rates.  
 APRA also expects ADIs to use a suitably prudent period for assessing the repayment of 
credit card or other revolving personal debt when calculating a borrower’s expenses. For 
example, an ADI may assess a borrower’s repayment obligation for credit card or other 
revolving personal debt using a rate of three per cent per month on the total committed 
limit for such facilities. 
 For interest-only loans, APRA expects ADIs to assess the ability of the borrower to meet 
future repayments on a principal and interest basis for the specific term over which the 
principal and interest repayments apply, excluding the interest-only period. 
 A prudent ADI would regularly review its buffers and floors. The method for reviewing 
buffers and floors would allow an ADI to ascertain whether the current buffer and floor is 
appropriate in relation to the interest rate cycle, and would take into account historical 
interest rate movements and interest rate forecasts, as well as key economic indicators 
over an appropriate time horizon. Reviews would typically be undertaken on a quarterly 
basis and when interest rates change. 
Assessment and verification of income, living expenses and other 
debt commitments 
 As part of its serviceability assessment, an ADI would typically assess and verify a 
borrower’s income and expenses having regard to the particular circumstances of the 
borrower.  
 When assessing a borrower’s income, a prudent ADI would discount or disregard 
temporarily high or uncertain income. Similarly, it would apply appropriate adjustments 
when assessing seasonal or variable income sources. For example, significant discounts 
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
15 
are generally applied to reported bonuses, overtime, rental income on investment 
properties, other types of investment income and variable commissions; in some cases, 
they may be applied to child support or other social security payments, pensions and 
superannuation income. Prudent practice is to apply discounts of at least 20 per cent on 
most types of non-salary income; in some cases, a higher discount would be 
appropriate. In some circumstances, an ADI may choose to use the lowest documented 
value of such income over the last several years, or apply a 20 per cent discount to the 
average amount received over a similar period. 
 Future changes in a borrower’s circumstances, such as the likely lower income and 
repayment capacity during the impending retirement of a borrower, would also be 
considered by a prudent ADI. It would be prudent not to rely on the presumption of future 
superannuation lump sums unless the lump sum is verifiable and reasonably imminent.  
 A prudent ADI would be expected to make reasonable inquiries and take reasonable 
steps to verify a borrower’s available income. Verification of a borrower’s stated income 
would normally be achieved through a combination of factors, for example: 
a) 
confirming employment status, i.e. whether permanent, casual, part-time, 
contractor or fixed term contract;  
b) 
reviewing recent payslips detailing regular salary or wage income of the borrower, 
including usual shift penalties; 
c) 
seeking written advice from the borrower’s employer or accountant/tax advisor 
confirming actual or likely income levels; 
d) 
reviewing income tax assessment notices and returns; 
e) 
reviewing bank statements that confirm regular salary credits;  
f) 
reviewing other documents pertaining to income (e.g. business activity statement); 
and 
g) 
making independent enquiries into the borrower’s credit history (e.g. through credit 
reporting bodies). 
 Self-employed borrowers are generally more difficult to assess for borrowing capacity, 
as their income tends to be less certain. Accordingly, a prudent ADI would make 
reasonable inquiries and take reasonable steps to verify a self-employed borrower’s 
available income. Verification of a self-employed borrower’s stated income is normally 
achieved through a combination of obtaining income and cash flow verification and 
supporting documentation, including third-party verification. This could include, for 
example: 
a) 
seeking written advice from the accountant/tax advisor confirming actual or likely 
income levels; 
b) 
reviewing income tax assessment notices and returns; 
c) 
reviewing bank statements from an ADI that confirm income;  
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
16 
d) 
reviewing other documents pertaining to income (e.g. business activity statement); 
and 
e) 
making independent enquiries into the borrower’s credit history (e.g. through credit 
reporting bodies). 
 In the case of investment property, common industry practice is to include expected rent 
on a residential property as part of a borrower’s income when making a loan origination 
decision. However, it would be prudent to make allowances to reflect periods of non-
occupancy. ADIs would normally place less reliance on third-party estimates of future 
rental income than on actual rental receipts from a property. In APRA’s view, prudent 
serviceability policies incorporate a minimum haircut of 20 per cent on expected rental 
income, with larger haircuts appropriate for properties where there is a higher risk of 
non-occupancy. A prudent ADI would also account for a borrower’s investment property-
related fees and expenses (e.g. strata requirements), for example, by including property 
expenses in estimates of living expenses or by deducting property expenses from 
expected net rental income. Good practice would be for an ADI to place no reliance on a 
borrower’s potential ability to access future tax benefits from operating a rental property 
at a loss. Where an ADI chooses to include such a tax benefit, it would be prudent to 
assess it at the current interest rate rather than one with a buffer applied. 
 A borrower’s living expenses are a key component of a serviceability assessment. Such 
expenses materially affect the ability of a residential mortgage borrower to meet 
payments due on a loan. ADIs typically use the Household Expenditure Measure (HEM)
4 
or the Henderson Poverty Index (HPI)
5  in loan calculators to estimate a borrower’s living 
expenses. Although these indices are extensively used, they might not always be an 
appropriate proxy of a borrower’s actual living expenses. Reliance solely on these 
indices generally would therefore not meet APRA’s requirements for sound risk 
management. APRA therefore expects ADIs to use the greater of a borrower’s declared 
living expenses or an appropriately scaled version of the HEM or HPI indices. That is, if 
the HEM or HPI is used, a prudent ADI would apply a margin linked to the borrower’s 
income to the relevant index. In addition, an ADI would update these indices in loan 
calculators on a frequent basis, or at least in line with published updates of these indices 
(typically quarterly). Prudent practice is to include a reasonable estimate of housing 
costs even if a borrower who intends to rely on rental property income to service the 
loan does not currently report any personal housing expenses (for example, due to living 
arrangements with friends or relatives). 
 A prudent ADI would have effective procedures to verify a potential borrower’s existing 
debt commitments and to take reasonable steps to identify undeclared debt 
commitments. 
 In addition, it would be prudent for an ADI to retain complete documentation of the 
information supporting a residential mortgage approval, including paper or digital copies 
 
4 Refer to http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/12ce1aabe68b47f3ca256982001cc5da/5f1422f1af472d80ca 
256bd00026aee6!OpenDocument 
5 Refer to http://www.melbourneinstitute.com/miaesr/publications/indicators/poverty-lines-australia.html  
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
17 
of documentation on income and expenses and the steps taken to verify these items. This 
documentation would be retained for a reasonable number of years after origination. 
Sound documentation practices provide a clear audit trail, demonstrate appropriate 
verification of serviceability and can assist in identifying misrepresentations or fraud.  
Overrides 
 An override occurs when a residential mortgage loan is approved outside an ADI’s loan 
serviceability criteria or other lending policy parameters or guidelines. Overrides are 
occasionally needed to deal with exceptional or complex loan applications. However, a 
prudent ADI’s risk limits would appropriately reflect the maximum level of allowable 
overrides and be supported by a robust monitoring framework that tracks overrides 
against risk tolerances. It is also good practice to implement limits or triggers to 
manage specific types of overrides, such as loan serviceability overrides. APRA expects 
that where overrides breach the risk limits, appropriate action would be taken by senior 
management to investigate and address such excesses.  
 There are varying industry practices with respect to defining, approving, reporting and 
monitoring overrides. APRA expects an ADI to have a framework that clearly defines 
overrides. In doing so, it is important that any loan approved outside an ADI’s 
serviceability criteria parameters should be captured and reported as an override. This 
includes loans where the borrower is assessed to have a net income surplus of less than 
$0 (even if temporary) or where exceptions to minimum serviceability requirements have 
been granted, such as waivers on income verification. ADIs may have their own 
definitions that include other types of loans (such as those outside LVR limits) as 
overrides for internal risk monitoring purposes.  
 In addition, a sound framework would also detail the approval process, documentary 
requirements for an override approval (including acceptable reasons for an override) and 
an oversight mechanism to monitor and report such overrides. It is good practice to 
monitor and report the reasons for overrides, to provide an aggregate view for senior 
management and enable an assessment of trends.  
 Deliberate misreporting or non-reporting of overrides is indicative of poor practice. A 
sound risk management framework would capture such instances, prompting 
appropriate investigation and swift and appropriate action where necessary.  
 Good practice is for regular override reporting to be provided to senior management and 
to the Board. Such reporting would include:  
a) 
delinquency rates for residential mortgage loans approved as overrides and 
exceptions;  
b) 
tracking against risk tolerance limits for overrides;  
c) 
reasons for overrides; and 
d) 
distribution of overrides across business units, products, locations, third-party 
originators and, where relevant, ADI officers associated with a disproportionate 
number of overrides. 
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
18 
Other expectations with respect to loan origination by third parties 
 As noted in Prudential Standard CPS 231 Outsourcing (CPS 231), an ADI retains both the 
risk and responsibility for material outsourced functions, including origination and 
ongoing management of residential mortgage lending. Where lending authority is 
delegated to third parties, robust mechanisms need to be implemented to ensure that 
the delegation is appropriate and is subject to oversight by the ADI’s senior 
management. In addition, adherence to policies and procedures by the delegated 
authority would be subject to regular audit.  
 In circumstances where third parties (such as a mortgage broker) accept or complete 
applications, but have no ability to approve a residential mortgage loan, a sound 
oversight process is necessary. In particular, a prudent ADI would have appropriate 
procedures in place to verify the accuracy and completeness of the information provided. 
 Good practice would be for an ADI, rather than a third party, to perform income 
verification. However, if a third party does perform such a role, an ADI would be expected 
to implement appropriate oversight processes covering income verification. Such 
oversight would extend to third parties that are granted any form of DLA, even if the 
ability to approve transactions is within policy limits. An ADI would also monitor and test 
the integrity of the third-party approval and verification processes periodically, either 
directly or through operationally independent persons. 
 Consistent with CPS 231, a prudent ADI would ensure that its arrangements with third-
party residential mortgage loan originators allow for timely cessation of such 
arrangements should the ADI form the view that it is no longer able to place reliance on 
the third party.  
Scorecard approvals 
 Some ADIs use rules-based scorecards or quantitative models in the residential 
mortgage loan evaluation process. In such cases, good practice would include close 
oversight and governance of the credit scoring processes. Where decisions suggested by 
a scorecard are overridden, it is good practice to document the reasons for the override.  
 Scorecards or models would be subject to regular monitoring and validation to ensure 
that they remain effective over time. A prudent ADI would develop and document an 
effective governance framework and benchmarks to assess the performance of a 
scorecard or model, which would be overseen by the ADI’s senior management. 
 It would be good practice for an ADI using scorecards or similar models to develop its 
own tests, using internal or external expertise as appropriate. Reliance upon the model 
or scorecard vendor to provide model validation services can create a material conflict of 
interest, which an ADI would need to manage. In such cases, it would be prudent to seek 
an independent third-party assessor to mitigate the potential conflict of interest. 
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
19 
Specific loan types 
Interest-only loans 
 Borrowers may have legitimate reasons to prefer interest-only loans in some 
circumstances, such as for repayment flexibility or tax reasons. However, interest-only 
loans may carry higher credit risk in some cases, and may not be appropriate for all 
borrowers. This should be reflected in the ADI’s risk management framework, including 
its risk appetite statement, and also in the ADI’s responsible lending compliance 
program. APRA expects that an ADI would only approve interest-only loans for owner-
occupiers where there is a sound and documented economic basis for such an 
arrangement and not based on inability to service a loan on a principal and interest 
basis. APRA expects interest-only periods offered on residential mortgage loans to be of 
limited duration, particularly for owner-occupiers. As noted above, a prudent 
serviceability assessment would incorporate the borrower’s ability to repay principal and 
interest over the actual repayment period. 
Foreign currency loans 
 In APRA’s view, it is not prudent to extend foreign currency-denominated loans against 
domestic currency (e.g. Australian dollar) income streams or against domestic currency 
collateral. However, an ADI may occasionally extend a foreign-currency loan to a 
borrower with a foreign currency-denominated income stream. In such cases, the ADI 
could face additional challenges in validating offshore income streams. Loans extended 
on such a basis require substantial loan origination expertise. It would also be good 
practice to discount offshore income in assessing a borrower’s loan servicing capacity. 
Loans with non-standard/alternative documentation 
 Loans with non-standard/alternative documentation can involve circumstances where 
the borrower is self-employed or has an uncertain income stream and is unable to 
provide standard documentation that enables easy verification of income. Good practice 
is to ensure that a loan with non-standard/alternative documentation is warranted due to 
the borrower’s situation rather than reluctance by the borrower to provide income 
documentation. It is not good practice to underwrite loans on limited verification of a 
borrower’s income where full verification is reasonably available. 
 Where a borrower is unable to provide standard documentation, such as pay slips, an 
ADI would usually seek alternative documentation such as extensive cash flow history 
APRA expects that an ADI will recognise, in its risk appetite, portfolio limits for loans that 
may be more vulnerable to serviceability stress and possible material decreases in 
property value in a housing market downturn, and could therefore generate higher 
losses.  
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
20 
through bank statements, business activity statements, recent tax assessment notices 
or third-party confirmations from accountants or other professionals.  
 In assessing serviceability, a prudent ADI would seek to address any increased risk 
through appropriate pricing and significantly lower LVRs. 
Reverse mortgages 
 Reverse mortgage loans give rise to unique operational, legal and reputational risks, 
including in relation to consumer protection laws, which could affect loan enforceability. 
An ADI undertaking such lending would need to take appropriate measures to address 
these risks. Such measures could, amongst others, include: 
a) 
assessment of the need for actuarial advice; 
b) 
LVR caps related to the age of the borrower; 
c) 
documented procedures applicable to the regular revaluation of properties 
underpinning reverse mortgages; 
d) 
cautioning borrowers against waiving independent legal and financial advice; and 
e) 
higher levels of controls and monitoring when marketing such loans through third-
party channels. 
Home equity lines-of-credit 
 The revolving nature of home equity lines-of-credit loans may increase the risk of 
outstanding balances at default. As a generalisation, HELOCs can result in different 
delinquency and default outcomes compared to traditional principal and interest 
products. A prudent ADI would establish checks and limits for such loans as part of its 
risk appetite statement. Examples include portfolio limits and limits on the non-
amortising portion of such loans. 
Loans to self-managed superannuation funds 
 Some ADIs provide loans to property held in SMSFs. The nature of loans to SMSFs 
gives rise to unique operational, legal and reputational risks that differ from those of 
a traditional mortgage loan. Legal recourse in the event of default may differ from a 
standard mortgage, even with guarantees in place from other parties. Customer 
objectives and suitability may be more difficult to determine. In performing a 
serviceability assessment, ADIs would need to consider what regular income, subject 
to haircuts as discussed above, is available to service the loan and what expenses 
should be reflected in addition to the loan servicing. APRA expects that a prudent ADI 
would identify the additional risks relevant to this type of lending and implement loan 
application assessment processes and criteria that adequately reflect these risks. 
APRA also expects that a decision to undertake lending to SMSFs would be approved 
by the ADI at an appropriate governance forum and explicitly incorporated into the 
ADI’s policy framework.  
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
21 
Security valuation 
Valuation methods 
 Techniques such as desk-top assessments, kerb-side assessment, automated valuation 
methods (AVMs) and reviews of contracts of sale are all acceptable valuation 
assessments, in the appropriate context. As the risk associated with collateral 
increases, or the coverage of a given loan by collateral decreases, the need for specialist 
valuation also increases. 
 A prudent ADI contemplating the use of alternative valuation methods such as AVMs 
would subject proposals to thorough analysis and develop a risk management capability 
that includes: 
a) 
a hierarchy of acceptable methods of determining value that is appropriate to the 
level of risk;  
b) 
analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of the relevant approaches/models being 
considered, including an understanding of the methodologies used, sources of data 
employed and how the service provider may be able to assist in re-engineering the 
ADI’s processes; 
c) 
details of any back-testing of a statistically random sample of AVMs and desk-top 
assessments or auditing arrangements undertaken by the service provider; 
d) 
clarity of the output to be provided and how it would be integrated with the ADI’s 
processes; 
e) 
ongoing monitoring of tools used, processes that capture evidence of action taken 
when values are deemed to be unreliable and periodic back-testing undertaken by 
the ADI to independently validate reliability of outcomes; and 
f) 
appropriate training for staff on operational requirements.  
 Where an ADI relies on a panel of approved valuation professionals, sound credit risk 
management practice would provide for the panel to be periodically reviewed by senior 
risk management staff of the ADI. Valuer selection would be conducted by the ADI’s risk 
management area, rather than sales staff, and the involvement of ADI sales or product 
staff in panel management would be minimal. 
The valuation of underlying collateral can be undertaken in a range of ways. A full on-site 
valuation is good practice, although APRA acknowledges the benefit of tailoring an ADI’s 
valuation policy to its circumstances. APRA expects that an ADI will document its 
valuation policy. 
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
22 
 An ADI is required to have regard to the requirements governing security valuation 
practices, including valuation of security in the form of property, as detailed in 
Attachment A of Prudential Standard APS 220 Credit Risk Management (APS 220). Sound 
risk management practices would include valuation reports prepared with professional 
skill and diligence, valuers selected on the basis of appropriate professional 
qualifications and maintaining comprehensive valuation documentation for the term of 
the loan. The scope and extent of a valuation report would be commensurate with the 
property value and inherent risks. 
 Attempts by an ADI or third-party lending staff to pressure valuers to over-value 
properties are an indicator of poor practice and improper behaviour. A robust risk 
management framework would capture such instances, prompting appropriate 
investigation and swift and appropriate action where necessary. 
 The valuation management process itself may be outsourced to third parties. When the 
valuation management is outsourced, the oversight and control would be retained by the 
ADI’s credit risk management. For example, it is good practice for any override of 
valuation requirements to be limited to senior credit risk management of the ADI. 
 Good practice would be to ensure that claims against collateral are legally enforceable 
and could be realised in a reasonable period of time if necessary. This would include the 
ADI confirming that: 
a) 
the borrower has, or will have when the loan is extended, a clear title to the 
property;  
b) 
the characteristics of the property are as they have been represented; and 
c) 
the property serving as collateral is appropriately insured at the time of origination 
and is maintained under the contractual terms of the mortgage.  
 An ADI would typically seek to ensure that property serving as collateral could be readily 
linked to related residential mortgage lending facilities. Underinvestment in such 
collateral tracking capability could leave an ADI open to increased operational risks and 
losses. 
 An ADI would, as a matter of good practice, develop a policy on when a borrower (or 
connected group of borrowers) providing collateral in the form of mortgages over 
multiple residential properties is more akin to commercial lending than residential 
lending. This is particularly the case where one borrower holds multiple housing stock in 
the same title/deposited plan. In addition, where a developer or commercial borrower 
chooses to hold a number of residential properties longer term, as opposed to selling 
them, the risks are more likely to be of a commercial rather than residential nature.  
Loan-to-valuation ratios 
 Although mortgage lending risk cannot be fully mitigated through conservative LVRs, 
prudent LVR limits help to minimise the risk that the property serving as collateral will 
be insufficient to cover any repayment shortfall. Consequently, prudent LVR limits serve 
as an important element of portfolio risk management. APRA emphasises, however, that 
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
23 
loan origination policies would not be expected to be solely reliant on LVR as a risk-
mitigating mechanism.  
 A prudent ADI would monitor exposures by LVR bands over time. Significant increases in 
high LVR lending would typically be a trigger for senior management to review risk 
targets and internal controls over high LVR lending, with Board oversight. APRA has not 
formally defined ‘high LVR lending’, but experience shows that LVRs above 90 per cent 
(including capitalised LMI premium or other fees) clearly expose an ADI to a higher risk 
of loss. 
 Lending at low LVRs does not remove the need for an ADI to adhere to sound credit 
practice or consumer lending obligations. A prudent lender would seek to ensure that a 
residential mortgage loan has reasonable expectations of being repaid without recourse 
to the underlying collateral. An overall sound assessment would be based on the 
borrower’s repayment capacity at the time of loan origination rather than an overriding 
presumption that the value of collateral will appreciate. 
 ADIs typically require a borrower to provide an initial deposit primarily drawn from the 
borrower’s own funds. Imposing a minimum ‘genuine savings’ requirement as part of 
this initial deposit is considered an important means of reducing default risk. A prudent 
ADI would have limited appetite for taking into account non-genuine savings, such as 
gifts from a family member. In such cases, it would be prudent for an ADI to take all 
reasonable steps to determine whether non-genuine savings are to be repaid by the 
borrower and, if so, to incorporate these repayments in the serviceability assessment. 
 A prudent ADI would exhibit greater caution when relying on collateral values in periods 
of rapid growth in property prices. It may be appropriate for an ADI to strengthen its LVR 
constraints or re-assess its risk appetite in markets exhibiting rapid price appreciation. 
 Sound credit practice would include recalculating LVRs at the time of any top-up loan 
and other formal loan increases during the life of the loan. Any subsequent refinancing, 
including any second mortgage, charge or lien, would also typically result in the 
calculation of a new LVR at the point of refinancing. Such calculations would be based on 
appropriate and contemporary property valuations. Further, particular caution would 
need to be exercised in relation to any draw-down on the equity in the property, 
especially if the draw-down would increase the current LVR above the level originally 
agreed. Finally, any significant increase in loan exposure would normally be subject to a 
full assessment of the borrower’s repayment capacity.  
 In the case of valuation of off-the-plan sales, developer prices might not represent a 
sustainable resale value. Consequently, in such circumstances, a prudent ADI would 
make appropriate reductions in the off-the-plan prices in determining LVRs or seek 
independent professional valuations. Similarly, developer discounts would not be treated 
as part of the borrower’s deposit for LVR calculation purposes: such discounts reduce 
the sale price, but do not increase the borrower’s deposit. 
 Where an ADI’s risk appetite allows for higher LVR lending, good practice would provide 
that the additional risk in this lending would be mitigated by measures such as stronger 
serviceability-adjusted loan pricing and, in the case of IRB banks, higher expected loss 
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
24 
provisions and capital. APRA does not consider the sole use of coverage of loans by LMI 
as a sufficient control to mitigate high LVR risk.  
Guarantors 
 Although some loans include guarantor relationships, e.g. from a parent of the 
borrower, to cover shortfalls in minimum deposit requirements, these loans potentially 
carry a higher risk of default. A prudent ADI would assess the guarantor’s income and 
conduct independent checks on the creditworthiness of the guarantor, the enforceability 
of potential claims and the value of any collateral pledged by the guarantor. As with 
other product types, a prudent ADI would consider the need for appropriate portfolio 
limits within its risk appetite for such lending.  
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
25 
Hardship loans and collections 
 An ADI would typically formulate policies for dealing with delinquent residential 
mortgage loans. These policies would assist the ADI to appropriately balance the need to 
recover as much of the loan as is reasonably achievable with the need to observe the 
substantial body of law and community expectation as to how troubled borrowers would 
be treated. APRA’s experience is that reputational risk can be underestimated in such 
circumstances.  
 An ADI’s risk management framework would typically detail a formal plan for managing 
the collection process, including for periods where delinquency and loss rates are higher 
than expected.  
 APRA does not require or expect that an ADI’s management of hardship would focus 
solely upon rapid resolution and recovery of a defaulted residential mortgage loan. 
Rather, APRA’s expectation is that an ADI’s policy would strive to maximise its longer-
term financial and reputational position, as it addresses hardship among borrowers.  
 ADIs are obliged, under consumer laws and banking codes, to consider hardship 
variations to credit contracts for borrowers experiencing temporary financial difficulty. 
Hardship concessions can include a reduction in the interest rate or payment, 
lengthening of loan maturity, or full or partial deferral (capitalisation) of interest for a 
temporary period. Failure to comply, particularly where multiple residential mortgage 
loans may be involved, can carry a heavy cost for an ADI. A prudent ADI would seek to 
ensure it is fully cognisant of legal obligations in this respect and that such obligations 
are satisfied. Good practice would include testing and other mechanisms to ensure 
satisfactory outcomes can be achieved.  
 An ADI would be expected to have a full understanding of the risk profile of hardship 
loans and to ensure that these risks are appropriately reflected in internal management 
reporting, provisioning and capital adequacy calculations. 
 Where a residential mortgage loan is in default
6, a prudent ADI would usually undertake 
a full revaluation when assessing the value of the collateral. However, valuations other 
than a full valuation may be appropriate in limited circumstances, for example, a very 
low LVR. 
 Upon receiving a notice of hardship from a borrower, or where there is an increased risk 
of non-payment, an ADI would normally re-assess the borrower’s income, living 
expenses, assets and liabilities. The ADI would also assess whether the status of the 
 
6 Refer to paragraph 76 of Attachment A of APS 113. 
APRA expects that an ADI, as part of its credit risk appetite framework, will define its 
approach to resolving troubled loans, both individually and under conditions where an 
unusually large number of borrowers are distressed at the same time. 
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
26 
loan is performing or non-performing and whether there is a need to apply provisioning 
and/or revised capital charges.  
 It would not be prudent for an ADI to establish long-term capitalisation of principal and 
interest payments on troubled residential mortgage loans in the expectation that the 
market value of the mortgaged properties will increase from the current value.  
 An ADI following good practice would include a carefully considered collections strategy 
in its credit risk management framework for residential mortgage lending. The 
framework could include: 
a) 
a thorough understanding of the external environment that is used to proactively 
assess customers at risk of default; 
b) 
segmentation of borrowers depending on whether they are willing/not willing and 
able/not able to repay; 
c) 
adequate training for staff responsible for collection strategies to handle defaulting 
customers in a sensitive and efficient manner having regard to the ADI’s statutory 
and contractual rights and obligations;  
d) 
feedback into any risk models the ADI may use to calculate probability of defaults; 
and 
e) 
appropriate reporting to senior management and the Board on delinquencies, 
including recoveries and cost of collections. 
 APRA has observed varying practices with respect to prudential reporting on loans with 
hardship (or similar payment concessions). Sound practices in this area would include: 
a) 
arrears would continue to accrue based on the original scheduled payments until 
the loan is brought back into performing status. For prudential reporting purposes, 
ADIs would not freeze or re-age loans where hardship (or other similar payment) 
concessions have been granted; 
b) 
hardship or collections decisions and activities that include some form of ongoing 
concession beyond that normally available (non-commercial terms) are required to 
be reported as ‘restructured items’ in various APRA prudential returns. Non-
commerciality is not merely the application of renegotiated ongoing provision of a 
presumed normal interest charge. It could potentially include longer periods of 
interest-only lending and/or loan tenors beyond those normally offered for the 
product and purpose. Non-commercial terms could include agreements to 
capitalise interest and fees, awaiting property sale or other agreements, 
consistently renegotiating terms to avoid further collections activity and any ‘pay-
what-you-can’ type structures; and 
c) 
appropriate loan-loss collective provisioning for loans subject to hardship 
applications, given the potentially higher ultimate loss rates on these loans. 
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
27 
Stress testing 
 In addition to enterprise–wide stress tests, portfolio-level and risk-specific stress tests 
of residential mortgage lending portfolios are considered good practice.
7 
 A prudent ADI would regularly stress test its residential mortgage lending portfolio 
under a range of scenarios. Scenarios used for stress testing would include severe 
but plausible adverse conditions. 
 In developing scenarios, ADIs could benefit from consideration of international 
experience, as well as domestic experience and previous APRA stress test scenarios 
to determine what constitutes sufficient severity for such tests. Assumptions around 
economic growth, unemployment, property prices and interest rates are particularly 
important in formulating effective scenarios for residential mortgage portfolios. The 
scenario and modelling assumptions used for stress testing, and the impact of 
material variations in these assumptions on the results of the stress test, would be 
communicated to the ADI’s senior management. 
 The complexity and granularity of stress testing would take into account the scale 
and proportion of an ADI’s residential mortgage lending, and the risk characteristics 
within it. Good practice would be for an ADI to conduct stress testing at a sufficiently 
granular level to enable adequate sensitivity to the risk characteristics of different 
loan types. These characteristics would typically include product type, LVR, LMI 
coverage (including counterparty credit risk), serviceability, geography, vintage, 
origination channel and borrower characteristics.  
 Results from portfolio stress tests enable the Board and senior management to 
review an ADI’s risk appetite, capital adequacy and relevant strategic business 
decisions in both current and potential environments. For example, stress tests 
might identify vulnerabilities in certain product or borrower segments that would 
prompt an ADI to tighten its loan origination criteria or lower risk appetite limits on 
those products. 
 Stress test models would ordinarily be appropriately validated and checked by an 
independent internal group or by an appropriately qualified external party. Vendor 
models, where used, would be appropriately customised to the specific risk profile of 
 
7 APS 110 requires an ADI to include stress testing and scenario analysis relating to potential risk exposures and 
available capital resources in its Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process (ICAAP). Guidance on the 
approaches used for stress testing can be found in Prudential Practice Guide CPG 110 Internal Capital Adequacy 
Assessment Process and Supervisory Review. 
Prudential Standard APS 110 Capital Adequacy (APS 110) requires ADIs to conduct 
enterprise-wide stress testing as part of internal capital planning. A core element of 
enterprise-wide stress testing is the development of loss expectations on material credit 
exposures, including residential mortgage lending (where relevant).  
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
28 
the ADI. Appropriate systems infrastructure and sound data architecture are central 
to conducting meaningful residential mortgage lending stress tests.  
 Stress testing arrangements include well-documented policies and procedures 
governing the stress testing program, including timely communication of the stress 
test results to the Board, senior management and other relevant staff. When 
reporting results, sufficient information would be provided to enable the Board and 
senior management to understand and challenge stress test assumptions and 
conclusions. This includes quantitative information on the scenario, results, capital 
impact, key assumptions and recommended actions arising from the stress tests. 
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
29 
Lenders mortgage insurance 
 LMI is not an alternative to loan origination due diligence. A prudent ADI would, 
notwithstanding the presence of LMI coverage, conduct its own due diligence, 
including comprehensive and independent assessment of a borrower’s capacity to 
repay, verification of minimum initial equity by borrowers, reasonable debt service 
coverage, and assessment of the value of the property.  
 An ADI needs a clear understanding of the specific requirements of an LMI provider 
at loan origination, for ongoing monitoring and servicing and for collection actions on 
loans covered by an LMI provider. An ADI would need to ensure compliance with all 
LMI requirements to avoid invalidating the cover in the event of a claim. The specific 
LMI requirements, and the obligations of the ADI, are best reflected in an ADI’s 
residential mortgage lending risk management framework. Good practice is for 
internal audit and/or risk management functions to periodically test and confirm an 
ADI’s compliance with the requirements of an LMI provider. 
 Although any review or audit by LMI providers over an ADI’s origination process 
could be insightful, a prudent ADI would not rely solely on the audit and compliance 
regimes of LMI providers. APRA expects an ADI to have its own hindsight review and 
audit regime. 
 
 
LMI serves a number of purposes. In particular, it can be used by ADIs as a risk mitigant, 
to smooth out the normal variability of losses that occurs over time and to diversify 
regional concentrations of risk. Although LMI is used to protect ADIs by transferring a 
share of the credit risk on a loan to an LMI provider, residual risks remain. Furthermore, 
ADI due diligence and other practices may be supplemented or enhanced, but they cannot 
be replaced by LMI. 
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
30 
Glossary 
ADI  
Authorised deposit-taking institution as defined in the Banking Act 1959.  
Automated valuation 
methods (AVM) 
A system or process that can provide an estimate of real estate property 
valuations using mathematical modelling, taking account of relevant 
factors, combined with a database. 
Credit reporting 
body 
An organisation that maintains consumer credit data files and provides 
credit information to authorised users, such as credit providers, usually for 
a fee. 
Cure rates  
Proportion of delinquent loans (usually mortgages or other retail loans) 
that exit that condition over a period of time by being brought current or 
repaid. 
Delegated Lending 
Authority (DLA) 
An authority, e.g. a lending officer or committee that can approve a loan 
(based on product, amount, risk grade or other risk characteristics). The 
authority is usually linked to the seniority or experience of the officer or 
committee. Also known as delegated credit authority, credit discretions or 
similar. 
Delinquency rates 
Percentage of loans that are in default over their contractual payments. 
Desk-top 
assessment 
A method of assessment that does not involve a physical inspection of the 
residential property. 
Debt service ratio 
(DSR) 
The proportion of a borrower’s income that is used to service the 
borrower’s debt obligations. 
Floating rate loan 
A loan with a floating or variable interest rate. Also known as a variable 
rate loan. 
FSB 
Financial Stability Board 
HEM 
Household Expenditure Measure 
Home equity line of 
credit (HELOC) 
A line of credit based on the amount of equity built up in a borrower’s 
property. As the loan is repaid the money becomes available for re-use. 
HPI 
Henderson Poverty Index 
Interest-only loan 
A loan on which only interest is paid during the loan term. The loan may 
revert to principal and interest repayments at the end of the loan term. The 
term is usually for a period of one to five years, although it may extend 
longer. 
Kerb-side 
assessment 
An exterior assessment by a valuer to confirm the location and observable 
condition of a property, used particularly for further advances on an 
existing mortgage and/or if house prices have not fluctuated significantly. 
The valuer will often draw on comparisons with properties recently sold in 
the area to support his/her estimation. 
Lenders mortgage 
insurance (LMI) 
Lenders’ mortgage insurance has its ordinary commercial meaning and 
includes insurance under a policy that protects a lender from losses in the 
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
31 
event of borrower default on a loan secured by a mortgage over residential 
or other property. 
Loan origination 
Process by which a lender determines whether and under what conditions 
to make a loan. 
Loan vintage 
Identification of a loan, typically for risk analysis, based on the year in 
which a loan was originated. 
Loan-to-valuation 
ratio (LVR) 
The ratio of the amount of the loan outstanding to the value of the property 
securing the loan. 
Mortgage 
prepayment buffer 
The total balance of mortgage repayments that have been paid ahead of 
their due date. 
Net income surplus 
(NIS) 
The net income available to a borrower after taxes, living expenses and 
financial commitments. 
Off-the-plan 
valuation 
A valuation made on the basis of a development plan, not on the basis of 
the finished property. The valuer/purchaser may be able to view a display 
unit and sample finishes. 
Override 
Approval of a loan that is outside an ADI’s lending policy. 
PPG 
Prudential practice guide 
Reverse mortgage 
A mortgage that allows a borrower to borrow money using equity in his/her 
home as security. The loan may be taken as a lump sum, a regular income 
stream, a line of credit or a combination of these options. Interest is 
charged as for any other loan, except no repayments are made while the 
person lives in the home. Interest compounds over time and is added to the 
loan balance. The loan is repayable in full (including interest and fees) 
when the person sells the home, dies or moves into aged care. 
Scorecard 
An automated tool for assessing borrower risk that aids a lender in the 
granting of consumer credit. 
SMSF 
Self-managed superannuation fund 
 
 
 
 
 


--- End of file: APG 223 Residential Mortgage Lending.txt ---

FINAL 
January 2023 
APS 110 - 1 
Prudential Standard APS 110 
Capital Adequacy 
Objectives and key requirements of this Prudential
Standard 
 
This Prudential Standard requires an authorised deposit-taking institution (ADI) to 
maintain adequate capital, on both a Level 1 and Level 2 basis, to act as a buffer 
against the risk associated with its activities. 
The ultimate responsibility for the prudent management of capital of an ADI rests 
with its Board of directors. The Board must ensure the ADI maintains an appropriate 
level and quality of capital commensurate with the type, amount and concentration 
of risks to which the ADI is exposed. 
The key requirements of this Prudential Standard are that an ADI and any Level 2 
group must: 
•
have an Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process;
•
maintain required levels of regulatory capital;
•
operate a capital conservation buffer and a countercyclical capital buffer;
•
inform APRA of any adverse change in actual or anticipated capital adequacy;
and
•
seek APRA’s approval for any planned capital reductions.
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
Table of Contents 
Authority ........................................................................................................... 3 
Application ....................................................................................................... 3 
Interpretation .................................................................................................... 3 
Definitions ........................................................................................................ 3 
Adjustments and exclusions ............................................................................ 4 
Previous exercise of discretion ........................................................................ 4 
Responsibility for capital management ............................................................ 4 
Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process .............................................. 5 
Minimum risk-based capital adequacy requirements ....................................... 8 
Capital floor ...................................................................................................... 8 
Capital conservation buffer .............................................................................. 8 
Countercyclical capital buffer ........................................................................... 9 
Minimum dollar amount of capital .................................................................. 10 
Minimum leverage ratio requirement .............................................................. 10 
Reductions in capital ...................................................................................... 10 
Notification requirements ............................................................................... 11 
Attachment A – Risk-based regulatory capital ratios ...................................... 13 
Attachment B – Constraints on capital distributions ....................................... 15 
Attachment C – Countercyclical capital buffer ............................................... 17 
Attachment D – Leverage ratio ...................................................................... 19 
APS 110 - 2 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
Authority 
1. 
This Prudential Standard is made under section 11AF of the Banking Act 1959 
(Banking Act).  
Application 
2. 
This Prudential Standard applies to all authorised deposit-taking institutions 
(ADIs) with the exception of: 
(a) 
foreign ADIs; or  
(b) 
purchased payment facility providers. 
3. 
A reference to an ADI in this Prudential Standard, unless otherwise indicated, is 
a reference to: 
(a) 
an ADI on a Level 1 basis; and 
(b) 
a group of which an ADI is a member on a Level 2 basis. 
4. 
If an ADI to which this Prudential Standard applies is: 
(a) 
the holding company for a group, the ADI must ensure that the requirements 
in this Prudential Standard are met on a Level 2 basis, where applicable; or 
(b) 
a subsidiary of an authorised non-operating holding company 
(authorised NOHC), the authorised NOHC must ensure that the 
requirements in this Prudential Standard are met on a Level 2 basis, where 
applicable. 
5. 
This Prudential Standard commences on 1 January 2023.  
Interpretation 
6. 
Terms that are defined in Prudential Standard APS 001 Definitions appear in bold 
the first time they are used in this Prudential Standard.  
7. 
Where this Prudential Standard provides for APRA to exercise a power or 
discretion, this power or discretion will be exercised in writing.  
8. 
In this Prudential Standard, unless the contrary intention appears, a reference to 
an Act, Regulations or Prudential Standard is a reference to the Act, Regulations 
or Prudential Standard as in force from time to time.  
Definitions 
9. 
The following definitions are used in this Prudential Standard: 
(a) 
IRB ADI – means an ADI which has been approved by APRA to use the 
internal ratings-based (IRB) approach to credit risk; 
APS 110 - 3 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 110 - 4 
(b) 
non-significant financial institution (non-SFI) – means an ADI that is not a 
significant financial institution;  
(c) 
significant financial institution (SFI) – means an ADI that is an IRB ADI, 
or a standardised ADI that:  
(i) 
is a foreign-owned ADI;  
(ii) 
has total assets in excess of AUD $20 billion;  
(iii) operates a trading book;  
(iv) has material non-centrally cleared derivative exposures;  
(v) 
has activities outside of Australia and sources funding offshore; or 
(vi) is determined as such by APRA, having regard to matters such as 
complexity in its operations or its membership of a group;  
(d) 
standardised ADI – means an ADI which has not been approved by APRA 
to use the internal ratings-based approach to credit risk.  
Adjustments and exclusions 
10. 
APRA may adjust or exclude a specific prudential requirement in this Prudential 
Standard in relation to one or more ADIs or authorised NOHCs.1
1  
Refer to subsection 11AF(2) of the Banking Act. 
Previous exercise of discretion 
11. 
An ADI must contact APRA if it seeks to place reliance, for the purposes of 
complying with this Prudential Standard, on a previous exemption or other 
exercise of discretion by APRA under a previous version of this Prudential 
Standard. 
Responsibility for capital management 
12. 
The Board of an ADI must ensure that the ADI maintains a level and quality of 
capital commensurate with the type, amount and concentration of risks to which 
the ADI is exposed from its activities.2
2  
Unless otherwise indicated, a reference to the Board of an ADI in this Prudential Standard is also 
a reference, where relevant, to the Board of the entity that heads the Level 2 group. 
 In doing so, the Board must have regard 
to any prospective changes in the ADI’s risk profile and capital holdings. 
13. 
An ADI that is a member of a group may be exposed to risks, including 
reputational and contagion risk, through its association with other members of the 
group. Problems arising in other group members may compromise the financial 
and operational position of the ADI. The Board, in determining the capital 
adequacy of the ADI at Level 1, must have regard to: 
                                                 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
(a) 
risks posed to the ADI by other members of the group, including the impact 
on the ability of the ADI to raise funding and additional capital should the 
need arise;  
(b) 
obligations, both direct and indirect, arising from the ADI’s association 
with group members that could give rise to a call on the capital of the ADI; 
and 
(c) 
the ability to freely transfer capital (including situations where the group is 
under financial or other forms of stress) from members of the group to 
recapitalise the ADI or other members of the group. This includes 
consideration of: 
(i) 
the integration of business operations within the group; 
(ii) 
the importance of members of the group to the group; 
(iii) the impact of cross-border jurisdictional issues; 
(iv) differences in legislative and regulatory requirements that may apply 
to group members; and 
(v) 
the impact of taxation and other factors on the ability to realise 
investments in, or transfer surplus capital from, group members. 
Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process 
APS 110 - 5 
14. 
An ADI must have an Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process 
(ICAAP) that must be: 
(a) 
adequately documented, with the documentation made available to APRA 
on request; and 
(b) 
approved by the ADI’s Board initially, and when significant changes are 
made. 
15. 
An ADI’s ICAAP must be appropriate to the ADI’s size, business mix and 
complexity of its operations and group structure. 
16. 
An ADI that is part of a group may rely on the ICAAP of the group provided that 
the Board of the ADI is satisfied that the group ICAAP meets the criteria in 
paragraph 17 of this Prudential Standard in respect of the ADI. 
17. 
The ICAAP must include at a minimum:  
(a) 
adequate policies, procedures, systems, controls and personnel to identify, 
measure, monitor and manage the risks arising from the ADI’s activities on 
a continuous basis, and the capital held against such risks;  
(b) 
a strategy for ensuring adequate capital is maintained over time, including 
specific capital targets set out in the context of the ADI’s risk profile, the 
ADI’s risk appetite and Regulatory Capital requirements. This includes 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
plans for how target levels of capital are to be met and the means available 
for sourcing additional capital where required; 
(c) 
actions and procedures for monitoring the ADI’s compliance with its 
regulatory capital requirements and capital targets. This includes the setting 
of triggers to alert management to, and specified actions to avert and rectify, 
potential breaches of these requirements; 
(d) 
stress testing and scenario analysis relating to potential risk exposures and 
available capital resources; 
(e) 
processes for reporting on the ICAAP and its outcomes to the Board and 
senior management of the ADI, and for ensuring that the ICAAP is taken 
into account in making business decisions;  
(f) 
policies to address the capital impact of material risks not covered by 
explicit regulatory capital requirements; and 
(g) 
an ICAAP summary statement as defined in paragraph 18 of this Prudential 
Standard. 
18. 
The ICAAP summary statement is a high-level document that describes and 
summarises the capital assessment and management processes of the ADI. It must 
address the aspects of the ICAAP listed in paragraphs 17(a) to 17(f) of this 
Prudential Standard, and also include: 
(a) 
a statement of the objectives of the ICAAP, the expected level of financial 
soundness associated with the capital targets and the time horizon over 
which the ICAAP applies;  
(b) 
a description of the key assumptions and methodologies utilised by the ADI 
in its ICAAP, including stress testing and scenario analysis;  
(c) 
triggers for reviewing the ICAAP in light of changes to business operations, 
regulatory, economic and financial market conditions, group structure and 
other factors affecting the ADI’s risk profile and capital resources;  
(d) 
a summary of the ADI’s policy for reviewing its ICAAP, including who is 
responsible for the review, details of the frequency and scope of the review, 
and mechanisms for reporting on the review and its outcomes to the Board 
and senior management;  
(e) 
a description of the basis of measurement of capital used in the ICAAP, and 
an explanation of the differences where this basis differs from that used for 
regulatory capital; and 
(f) 
references to supporting documentation and analysis as relevant. 
19. 
An ADI must ensure that its ICAAP is subject to regular and robust review by 
appropriately qualified persons who are operationally independent of the conduct 
of capital management. The frequency and scope of the review must be 
appropriate to the ADI, having regard to its size, business mix, complexity of its 
APS 110 - 6 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
operations and group structure, and the nature and extent of any changes that have 
occurred or are likely to occur in its business profile or its risk appetite. A review 
must be conducted at least every three years. The review must be sufficient to 
reach a view on whether the ICAAP is adequate and effective. 
20. 
An ADI must, on an annual basis, prepare a report on the implementation of its 
ICAAP (ICAAP report). A copy of the ICAAP report must be provided to APRA 
no later than three months from the end of the period covered by that report.  
21. 
The ICAAP report must include: 
(a) 
detailed information on current and three-year projected capital levels 
relative to minimum regulatory capital requirements and target levels; 
(b) 
detailed information on the actual outcomes of applying the ICAAP over 
the period, relative to the planned outcomes in the previous ICAAP report 
(including analysis of the ADI’s actual capital position relative to minimum 
regulatory capital requirements and capital targets and actual versus 
planned capital management actions); 
(c) 
a description of material changes to the ICAAP since the previous ICAAP 
report;  
(d) 
detail and outcomes of stress testing and scenario analysis used in 
undertaking the ICAAP;  
(e) 
a breakdown of capital usage over the planning horizon, as relevant, by 
material: 
(i) 
business activity; 
(ii) 
group members; 
(iii) geographic spread of exposures; and 
(iv) risk types; 
(f) 
an assessment of anticipated changes in the ADI’s risk profile or capital 
management processes over the planning horizon;  
(g) 
details of any review of the ICAAP since the previous ICAAP report, 
including 
any 
recommendations 
for 
change 
and 
how 
those 
recommendations have been, or are being, addressed; and 
(h) 
references to supporting documentation and analysis as relevant. 
22. 
The ICAAP report submitted to APRA by the ADI must be accompanied by a 
declaration approved by the Board and signed by the CEO stating whether: 
(a) 
capital management has been undertaken by the ADI in accordance with 
the ICAAP over the period and, if not, a description of, and explanation for, 
deviations;  
APS 110 - 7 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
(b) 
the ADI has assessed the capital targets contained in its ICAAP to be 
adequate given the size, business mix and complexity of its operations and, 
at Level 2, given the location of operations of group members and the 
complexity of the group structure; and 
(c) 
the information included in the ICAAP report is accurate in all material 
respects. 
Minimum risk-based capital adequacy requirements 
23. 
APRA will determine prudential capital requirements (PCRs) for an ADI. The 
PCRs, expressed as a percentage of total risk-weighted assets (RWA), will be set 
by reference to Common Equity Tier 1 Capital, Tier 1 Capital and Total 
Capital. PCRs may be determined at Level 1, Level 2 or both.  
24. 
The minimum PCRs that an ADI must maintain at all times are: 
(a) 
a Common Equity Tier 1 Capital ratio of 4.5 per cent; 
(b) 
a Tier 1 Capital ratio of 6.0 per cent; and 
(c) 
a Total Capital ratio of 8.0 per cent. 
APRA may determine higher PCRs for an ADI and may change an ADI’s PCRs 
at any time, including to incorporate additional capital required for loss-absorbing 
capacity, or on account of other supervisory review. An ADI must not publicly 
disclose its PCRs. 
25. 
An ADI must maintain risk-based regulatory capital ratios above its PCRs at all 
times. Risk-based regulatory capital ratios are to be calculated in accordance with 
Attachment A to this Prudential Standard.  
Capital floor 
26. 
An IRB ADI must calculate its total RWA for capital adequacy purposes in 
accordance with paragraph 4 of Attachment A to this Prudential Standard. 
Capital conservation buffer 
27. 
An ADI must hold a capital conservation buffer above its Common Equity Tier 1 
Capital PCR or is otherwise subject to the capital distribution constraints set out 
in paragraph 30 of this Prudential Standard. An ADI must meet its capital 
conservation buffer with Common Equity Tier 1 Capital. The capital conservation 
buffer is: 
(a) 
2.5 per cent of total RWA for standardised ADIs. The sum of the Common 
Equity Tier 1 PCR plus the capital conservation buffer will be no less than 
7.0 per cent of the standardised ADI’s total RWA; or 
(b) 
3.75 per cent of total RWA for IRB ADIs. The sum of the Common Equity 
Tier 1 PCR plus the capital conservation buffer will be no less than 8.25 per 
cent of the IRB ADI’s total RWA.  
APS 110 - 8 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APRA may vary the capital conservation buffer requirement for an ADI or class 
of ADIs.  
28. 
APRA may determine an ADI to be a domestic systemically important bank. A 
domestic systemically important bank must add an additional 1.0 per cent to its 
capital conservation buffer requirement under paragraph 27 of this Prudential 
Standard. 
29. 
Any amount of Common Equity Tier 1 Capital required to meet an ADI’s PCR 
for Tier 1 Capital or Total Capital, above the amount required to meet the PCR 
for Common Equity Tier 1 Capital, is not eligible to be included in the capital 
conservation buffer.  
30. 
Capital distribution constraints apply if an ADI’s Common Equity Tier 1 Capital 
ratio falls within the capital buffer ranges outlined in Table 1 of Attachment B. 
Capital distribution constraints apply to distributions that affect Common Equity 
Tier 1 Capital. Items considered to be distributions for these purposes include: 
(a) 
dividends and share buybacks;3
3  
This includes all distributions on mutual equity interests which must be treated as dividends for 
the purposes of this Prudential Standard, as required by Prudential Standard APS 111 Capital 
Adequacy: Measurement of Capital. 
 
(b) 
discretionary payments on Additional Tier 1 Capital instruments;4
4  
All payments of dividends or interest on eligible Additional Tier 1 Capital instruments are, by 
definition, required to be discretionary. 
 and  
(c) 
discretionary bonus payments to staff.5
5  
This would include any remuneration payments that are made upon the exercise of a discretionary 
judgement of the Board or senior management of an ADI as to the amount or timing of payment. 
 
31. 
An ADI may apply to APRA to make payments in excess of the constraints 
imposed by the capital conservation buffer regime. APRA will only grant 
approval where it is satisfied that an ADI has established measures to raise capital 
equal to or greater than the amount above the constraint that it wishes to distribute. 
Countercyclical capital buffer 
32. 
An ADI must hold a countercyclical capital buffer, which must be met with 
Common Equity Tier 1 Capital, to be calculated in accordance with Attachment C 
to this Prudential Standard (ADI-specific countercyclical capital buffer).  
33. 
APRA will determine the Australian jurisdictional countercyclical capital buffer, 
that applies from time to time, at a level of between 0 and 3.5 per cent of total 
RWA. 
34. 
APRA will publish any decision to vary the level of the Australian jurisdictional 
countercyclical capital buffer up to 12 months before the date from which it 
                                                 
APS 110 - 9 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
applies. Any decision by APRA to reduce the level of the Australian jurisdictional 
countercyclical capital buffer will take effect immediately. 
35. 
The ADI-specific countercyclical capital buffer is applied by extending the range 
of the capital conservation buffer. Capital distribution constraints, as set out in 
Attachment B to this Prudential Standard, will apply if an ADI’s Common Equity 
Tier 1 Capital ratio falls within the extended capital buffer range (consisting of 
the capital conservation buffer plus the ADI-specific countercyclical capital 
buffer).  
Minimum dollar amount of capital 
36. 
APRA may also determine an ADI’s:  
(a) 
PCR, set by reference to Common Equity Tier 1 Capital, Tier 1 Capital 
and Total Capital;6
6  
Any minimum PCR dollar amount determined under this sub-paragraph applies in addition to 
minimum PCRs determined elsewhere under this Prudential Standard. 
 
(b) 
capital conservation buffer; or 
(c) 
countercyclical capital buffer 
as a minimum dollar amount. 
Minimum leverage ratio requirement 
37. 
An IRB ADI must, at all times, maintain a minimum leverage ratio of 3.5 per 
cent. APRA may vary the minimum leverage ratio requirement for an ADI.  
38. 
An IRB ADI must calculate its leverage ratio in accordance with Attachment D 
to this Prudential Standard. Where an IRB ADI: 
(a) 
is a member of a Level 2 group, the minimum leverage ratio requirement 
will apply only at Level 2; and 
(b) 
is not a member of a Level 2 group, the minimum leverage ratio requirement 
will apply at Level 1. 
39. 
APRA may apply a leverage ratio requirement to a standardised ADI. 
Reductions in capital 
40. 
An ADI or authorised NOHC (as applicable) must obtain APRA’s approval prior 
to making any planned reduction in capital, whether at Level 1 or Level 2. 
41. 
A planned reduction in an ADI’s capital includes: 
(a) 
a share buyback or the redemption, repurchase or repayment of any 
qualifying Common Equity Tier 1 Capital, Additional Tier 1 Capital and 
                                                 
APS 110 - 10 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
Tier 2 Capital instruments issued by the ADI (or by other entities included 
in the calculation of the ADI’s Level 2 capital);7
7  
For the avoidance of doubt, this does not include the repayment of a Tier 2 Capital instrument 
upon its contractual maturity date. 
 
(b) 
trading in the ADI’s own shares or capital instruments outside of any 
arrangement agreed with APRA in accordance with Prudential Standard 
APS 111 Capital Adequacy: Measurement of Capital (APS 111); and 
(c) 
the aggregate amount of dividend payments on ordinary shares that exceeds 
an ADI’s statutory after-tax earnings after taking into account any payments 
on more senior capital instruments, in the ADI’s financial year to which 
they relate.8
8  
This includes distributions on mutual equity interests which are also subject to the limits set out 
in Attachment I to APS 111.  
 For this purpose, the ADI’s financial year means a period of 
12 consecutive months covered by one or more sets of publicly available 
operating results preceding the date of the proposed payment of dividend 
or interest. 
42. 
An ADI or authorised NOHC (as applicable) proposing a capital reduction 
(whether at Level 1 or Level 2) must provide APRA with a forecast showing, at 
the respective Levels, the projected future capital position after the proposed 
capital reductions. The forecast should extend for at least two years.  
43. 
An ADI must satisfy APRA that the ADI’s capital, at Level 1 and Level 2 as 
appropriate, will remain adequate for its future needs after a proposed reduction. 
Notification requirements 
44. 
An ADI or an authorised NOHC (as applicable) must notify APRA of any breach 
or prospective breach of the capital requirements contained in this Prudential 
Standard and inform APRA of any remedial actions taken or planned to deal with 
the breach. 
45. 
An ADI or an authorised NOHC (as applicable) must inform APRA as soon as 
practicable of any: 
(a) 
significant departure from its ICAAP;  
(b) 
concerns it has about its capital adequacy (including projected losses), 
whether at Level 1 or Level 2, and the measures it proposes to take to 
address these concerns;  
(c) 
indication of significant adverse changes in market pricing of, or trading in, 
the capital instruments of the ADI or group of which it is a member 
(including pressures on the ADI to purchase its own capital instruments); 
or 
                                                 
APS 110 - 11 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
(d) 
other significant adverse changes in its capital, whether at Level 1 or 
Level 2. 
APS 110 - 12 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
Attachment A – Risk-based regulatory capital ratios 
1. 
An ADI’s Tier 1 Capital is the sum of its Common Equity Tier 1 Capital and 
Additional Tier 1 Capital. Its Total Capital is the sum of Tier 1 Capital and Tier 2 
Capital. The criteria for inclusion in Common Equity Tier 1 Capital, Additional 
Tier 1 Capital and Tier 2 Capital are set out in APS 111. 
2. 
Under APRA’s risk-based capital adequacy framework, an ADI’s capital 
adequacy is measured by means of risk-based capital ratios calculated by dividing 
each of its Common Equity Tier 1 Capital, Tier 1 Capital and Total Capital by its 
total RWA. That is: 
Common Equity Tier 1 Capital ratio = 
Common Equity Tier 1 Capital 
Total RWA 
Tier 1 Capital ratio =  
Tier 1 Capital 
Total RWA 
Total Capital ratio = 
Total Capital 
Total RWA 
Total RWA are calculated in accordance with paragraph 3 or paragraph 4 of this 
Attachment. 
3. 
Standardised ADIs must calculate total RWA as the sum of:  
(a) 
RWA determined in accordance with Prudential Standard APS 112 Capital 
Adequacy: Standardised Approach to Credit Risk (APS 112); 
(b) 
RWA determined in accordance with Prudential Standard APS 120 
Securitisation (APS 120); and 
(c) 
either: 
(i) 
for non-SFIs, 10 per cent of the sum of RWA calculated under sub-
paragraphs 3(a) and 3(b) of this Attachment as RWA for operational 
risk; or 
(ii) 
for SFIs, risk-weighted credit exposures calculated under Prudential 
Standard APS 180 Capital Adequacy: Counterparty Credit Risk 
(APS 180) and 12.5 times the sum of the capital charges determined 
under Prudential Standard APS 115 Capital Adequacy: 
Standardised Measurement Approach to Operational Risk 
APS 110 – Attachment A - 13 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
(APS 115), Prudential Standard APS 116 Capital Adequacy: 
Market Risk (APS 116) and APS 180.9
9  
For risk-weighted credit exposures under APS 180, refer to sub-paragraph 13(a) of APS 180. For 
capital charges under APS 180, refer to sub-paragraphs 13(b) and 13(c) of APS 180.  
 
4. 
IRB ADIs must calculate total RWA as the greater of: 
(a) 
the sum of: 
(i) 
RWA determined in accordance with APS 112 for those asset classes 
where an IRB ADI is required to use the standardised approach to 
credit risk, or where APRA has approved partial use; 
(ii) 
RWA determined in accordance with Prudential Standard APS 113 
Capital Adequacy: Internal Ratings-based Approach to Credit Risk 
(APS 113); 
(iii) RWA determined in accordance with APS 120;  
(iv) risk-weighted credit exposures calculated under APS 180;10
10  
Refer to sub-paragraph 13(a) of APS 180. 
 and 
(v) 
12.5 times the sum of the capital charges determined under APS 115, 
APS 116, APS 180 and Prudential Standard APS 117 Capital 
Adequacy: Interest Rate Risk in the Banking Book (APS 117);11
11  
Refer to sub-paragraphs 13(b) and 13(c) of APS 180. 
 or 
(b) 
72.5 per cent of total RWA calculated in accordance with paragraph 3 of 
this Attachment.12
12  
For the avoidance of doubt, an IRB ADI in this calculation must determine all credit RWA in 
accordance with APS 112, APS 120 and APS 180 only, and the capital charge for market risk as 
the sum of the capital charges for traded market risk, foreign exchange and commodities (TFC) 
calculated under the standard method in accordance with APS 116. 
Transition arrangements for market risk capital 
5. 
For the purpose of paragraph 4(b) of this Attachment, an IRB ADI may continue 
to determine its market risk capital charge using its internal model approach, 
rather than the standard method set out in APS 116, until 1 January 2025. 
                                                 
APS 110 – Attachment A - 14 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
Attachment B – Constraints on capital distributions 
1. 
Capital distribution constraints apply when an ADI’s Common Equity Tier 1 
Capital ratio is within the capital buffer (CB) range (consisting of the capital 
conservation buffer plus any countercyclical capital buffer). The CB range is 
divided into four quartiles for the purposes of determining the minimum capital 
conservation ratios, as set out in Table 1.  
Table 1: Minimum capital conservation ratios 
Common Equity Tier 1 Capital ratio  
 
Minimum capital conservation 
ratios (expressed as a percentage 
of earnings) 
Within first quartile of buffer 
PCR  to  ≤  (PCR + 0.25CB) 
 
100 
Within second quartile of buffer 
> (PCR + 0.25CB)  to  ≤  (PCR + 0.50CB) 
 
80 
Within third quartile of buffer 
> (PCR + 0.50CB)  to  ≤  (PCR + 0.75CB) 
 
60 
Within fourth quartile of buffer  
> (PCR + 0.75CB)  to  ≤  (PCR + CB) 
 
40 
Above top of buffer 
> (PCR + CB) 
 
0 
2. 
The minimum capital conservation ratios in Table 1 represent the percentage of 
earnings that an ADI must not distribute if its Common Equity Tier 1 Capital ratio 
falls within the corresponding quartile. If the Common Equity Tier 1 Capital ratio 
falls within the first quartile, the ADI must also cease all Tier 1 Capital 
distributions. 
3. 
Earnings are defined for the purposes of this Attachment as distributable profits 
calculated prior to the deduction of elements subject to the restriction on 
distributions. Earnings are calculated after the tax that would have been reported 
had none of the distributable items been paid. As such, any tax impact of making 
such distributions is reversed out. An ADI that does not have positive earnings 
and has a Common Equity Tier 1 Capital ratio less than the sum of its Common 
Equity Tier 1 PCR plus the capital conservation buffer must not make positive 
net distributions. 
APS 110 – Attachment B - 15 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
4. 
Payments made by an ADI that do not result in a depletion of Common Equity 
Tier 1 Capital are not considered to be distributions for the purposes of this 
Attachment. APRA may impose restrictions on capital distributions even where 
an ADI’s Common Equity Tier 1 Capital ratio is above the capital conservation 
buffer. 
5. 
APRA may impose limits on the period in which an ADI may operate within the 
capital conservation buffer range, on a case-by-case basis.  
APS 110 – Attachment B - 16 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
Attachment C – Countercyclical capital buffer 
1. 
An ADI must calculate the ADI-specific countercyclical capital buffer 
requirement as the weighted average of the jurisdictional countercyclical capital 
buffers that apply in jurisdictions in which the ADI has exposures.  
2. 
The weighting applied to the jurisdictional countercyclical capital buffer in each 
jurisdiction will be the risk-weighted amount of an ADI’s private sector credit 
exposures in that jurisdiction, divided by the risk-weighted amount of the ADI’s 
private sector credit exposures across all jurisdictions, where:  
(a) 
private sector credit exposures are: 
(i) 
on-balance sheet assets, off-balance sheet exposures and on- and off-
balance 
sheet 
securitisation 
and 
resecuritisation 
exposures 
determined under APS 112, APS 113 or APS 120, as relevant; and  
(ii) 
exposures for which an ADI calculates a trading book capital charge 
for specific risk, including equity specific risk, interest rate specific 
risk, incremental risk, securitisation and resecuritisation under 
APS 116, 
to private sector counterparties, excluding ADIs (and equivalent overseas 
deposit-taking institutions) but including other financial institutions; and 
(b) 
the risk-weighted amount of an ADI’s private sector credit exposures is the 
sum of: 
(i) 
the risk-weighted assets for the assets and exposures in paragraph 
2(a)(i) of this Attachment; and 
(ii) 
the risk-weighted equivalent trading book capital charges for 
exposures in paragraph 2(a)(ii) of this Attachment.   
3. 
When determining the jurisdiction to which a private sector credit exposure 
relates, ADIs must use an ultimate risk basis, where possible. An ADI must use 
the jurisdiction where the guarantor of the exposure resides, not where the 
exposure has been booked. 
4. 
APRA may require an ADI to apply a higher countercyclical capital buffer for a 
particular jurisdiction than may be determined by the regulator in that jurisdiction.  
5. 
For Level 2 purposes, the ADI-specific countercyclical capital buffer must cover 
all exposures incurred in relevant jurisdictions, even though the business may be 
undertaken by a member of the Level 2 group that is not itself an ADI or 
equivalent overseas deposit-taking institution. 
6. 
For the Value-at-Risk (VaR) for specific risk, the incremental risk charge and the 
comprehensive risk measurement charge included in calculating the ADI-specific 
countercyclical capital buffer, an ADI must consult with APRA to develop an 
approach that would translate these charges into individual instrument risk-
APS 110 – Attachment C - 17 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
weights that would then be allocated to the geographic location of the specific 
counterparties that make up the charge.  
APS 110 – Attachment C - 18 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
Attachment D – Leverage ratio 
1. 
An ADI must calculate its leverage ratio as follows: 
Tier 1 Capital 
Leverage ratio = 
Exposure Measure 
where: 
(a) 
Tier 1 Capital is determined in accordance with APS 111; and 
(b) 
the exposure measure is determined in accordance with this Attachment and 
is calculated as the sum of: 
(i) 
on-balance sheet exposures; 
(ii) 
non-market related off-balance sheet exposures; 
(iii) derivative exposures; and 
(iv) securities financing transaction (SFT) exposures.  
2. 
Unless otherwise specified in this Attachment, an ADI must follow Australian 
Accounting Standards in calculating its exposure measure, subject to the 
following: 
(a) 
physical or financial collateral, guarantees or other credit risk mitigation 
techniques must not be taken into account by an ADI to reduce the exposure 
measure;  
(b) 
netting of assets and liabilities is not permitted; and 
(c) 
securitisation exposures which meet the operational requirements for 
regulatory capital relief, as set out in APS 120, may be excluded from the 
exposure measure. All other securitisation exposures, including funding-
only and synthetic securitisations, must be included in the exposure 
measure.  
3. 
APRA may temporarily exclude central bank reserves from the leverage ratio 
exposure measure in exceptional macroeconomic circumstances. If APRA 
excludes central bank reserves, it may increase the minimum leverage ratio 
requirement commensurately to offset the impact of the exclusion. In the event 
that APRA excludes central bank reserves from the calculation of the exposure 
measure, an ADI must publicly disclose the impact of the exclusion, as well as its 
leverage ratio calculated without the benefit of the exclusion. 
On-balance sheet exposures 
4. 
For the purpose of calculating on-balance sheet assets, an ADI must include all 
balance sheet assets, including any on-balance sheet collateral for derivatives and 
APS 110 – Attachment D - 19 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
SFTs, but excluding on-balance sheet derivatives and SFTs covered by 
paragraphs 16 to 45 of this Attachment. 
5. 
Balance sheet assets deducted from Common Equity Tier 1 Capital and 
Additional Tier 1 Capital for the purposes of regulatory adjustments under 
APS 111 may be deducted from the exposure measure. 
6. 
Liability items must not be deducted from the exposure measure, including any 
gains and losses on fair value liabilities, or accounting value adjustments on 
derivative liabilities due to changes in an ADI’s own credit risk.  
7. 
On-balance sheet assets may be included in the exposure measure at their 
accounting values net of any provisions that have otherwise been deducted from 
Tier 1 Capital. 
8. 
Where an ADI holds assets in a fiduciary capacity, these assets may be excluded 
from the exposure measure provided that the assets meet the accounting criteria 
for derecognition and, where applicable, the accounting criteria for 
deconsolidation.  
Unsettled trades 
9. 
An ADI must account for regular-way purchases or sales of financial assets that 
have not been settled on the following basis: 
(a) 
ADIs which apply trade date accounting must reverse out any offsetting 
between cash receivables for unsettled sales and cash payables for unsettled 
purchases of financial assets. Thereafter, ADIs may offset between those 
cash receivables and cash payables (irrespective of whether such offsetting 
is permitted under Australian Accounting Standards) only if all of the 
following conditions are met: 
(i) 
the financial assets bought and sold that are associated with cash 
payables and receivables are measured at fair value through the 
income statement and included in the ADI’s trading book in 
accordance with Attachment A to APS 116; and 
(ii) 
the transactions of the financial assets are settled on a delivery-versus-
payment basis; and 
(b) 
ADIs which apply settlement date accounting must apply the treatment set 
out in paragraphs 12 and 15 of this Attachment.  
Cash pooling 
10. 
If an ADI uses cash pooling arrangements which combine the credit and debit 
balances of several individual participating customer accounts into a single 
account balance, the ADI may recognise the single account balance in its 
calculation of the exposure measure if: 
(a) 
the balances are transferred on at least a daily basis; and 
APS 110 – Attachment D - 20 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
(b) 
the ADI cannot be held liable for the balances on an individual basis upon 
the transfer, i.e. the ADI can only be held liable for a single claim based on 
the single account. 
11. 
If cash pooling arrangements do not meet the conditions set out in paragraph 10 
of this Attachment, the individual balances of the participating customer accounts 
must be reflected separately in the exposure measure. 
Non-market-related off-balance sheet exposures 
12. 
For the purpose of calculating non-market-related off-balance sheet exposures, 
an ADI must apply credit conversion factors (CCFs) to the gross notional amounts 
of off-balance sheet items.13
13  
Off-balance sheet items have the meaning given in APS 112.   
 An ADI must apply the CCFs set out in Table 17 of 
Attachment C to APS 112. 
13. 
For any off-balance sheet securitisation exposures, an ADI must apply the 
relevant CCFs as set out in paragraph 43 of APS 120.  
14. 
Provisions that have decreased Tier 1 Capital may be deducted from the credit 
exposure equivalent amount (i.e. the exposure amount after the application of the 
relevant CCF). However, the resulting off-balance sheet equivalent amount for 
these exposures cannot be less than zero.  
15. 
If the exposure amount relates to an unsettled regular-way financial asset 
purchase (i.e. the commitment to pay) that is accounted for at settlement date, an 
ADI must apply a CCF of 100 per cent. An ADI may offset commitments to pay 
for unsettled purchases and cash to be received for unsettled sales provided the 
following conditions are met: 
(a) 
the financial assets bought and sold that are associated with the cash 
payables and receivables are included in the ADI’s income statement at fair 
value and allocated to the ADI’s trading book in accordance with 
Attachment A to APS 116; and 
(b) 
the transactions of the financial assets are settled on a delivery-versus-
payment basis. 
Derivative exposures 
16. 
For the purpose of calculating the exposure measure, an ADI must apply the 
specific treatment set out in paragraphs 17 to 36 of this Attachment to any 
derivatives transaction.  
Treatment of derivatives 
17. 
An ADI must calculate its exposures associated with all derivative transactions, 
including where it sells protection using a credit derivative, as: 
exposure measure = 1.4*(RC + PFE) 
                                                 
APS 110 – Attachment D - 21 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
where: 
RC = the replacement cost, calculated according to paragraph 19 of this 
Attachment; and 
PFE = the potential future exposure, calculated according to paragraphs 20 and 
21 of this Attachment.  
18. 
An ADI must calculate its exposure to:  
(a) 
a single derivatives transaction not covered by an eligible bilateral netting 
agreement by applying the formula in paragraph 17 of this Attachment to 
each transaction separately; and  
(b) 
derivatives transactions covered by an eligible bilateral netting agreement 
by applying the formula in paragraph 17 of this Attachment at the netting 
set level.14
14  
Netting set has the meaning given in paragraph 8(s) of APS 180.  
 
For this purpose, an eligible bilateral netting agreement is one that meets the 
criteria in Attachment H to APS 112. Cross-product netting (i.e. between 
derivatives and SFTs) is not permitted. 
Calculation of the replacement cost 
19. 
The RC of a transaction or netting set is measured as follows: 
RC = max {V - CVMr + CVMp, 0} 
where: 
V = the market value of the individual derivative transaction, or of the derivative 
transactions in a netting set; 
CVMr = the cash variation margin received that meets the conditions set out in 
paragraph 23 of this Attachment and for which the amount has not already 
reduced the market value of the derivative transaction V under Australian 
Accounting Standards; and 
CVMp = the cash variation margin provided by the ADI that meets the conditions 
set out in paragraph 23 of this Attachment and for which the amount has not 
already increased the market value of the derivative transaction V under 
Australian Accounting Standards.  
Calculation of the potential future exposure 
20. 
The PFE for derivative exposures must be calculated in accordance with 
Attachment D to APS 180. Specifically,  
PFE = m*AddOnaggregate 
                                                 
APS 110 – Attachment D - 22 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
where: 
m= 1; and 
AddOnaggregate = the aggregation of all add-on components calculated in 
accordance with Attachment D to APS 180. The maturity factor used must reflect 
the treatment for margined and unmargined transactions. 
21. 
Written options must be included in the leverage ratio exposure measure, even 
where the exposure at default may be set to zero under APS 180.  
Treatment of related collateral 
22. 
Subject to paragraphs 24 and 29 of this Attachment, an ADI:  
(a) 
must not reduce its exposure measure by the amount of any derivatives 
collateral received from a counterparty; and 
(b) 
must increase its exposure measure by the amount of any derivatives 
collateral provided by it to a counterparty, where the provision of that 
collateral has reduced the value of its balance sheet assets under Australian 
Accounting Standards. 
Treatment of cash variation margin 
23. 
An ADI may reduce its exposure measure by treating the cash portion of variation 
margin exchanged between counterparties as a form of pre-settlement payment, 
if the following conditions are met:  
(a) 
for trades not cleared through a qualifying central counterparty (QCCP),15
15  
QCCP has the meaning given in paragraph 8(w) of APS 180. 
 
the cash received by the recipient counterparty must not be segregated. 
Cash variation margin would satisfy the non-segregation criteria if the 
recipient counterparty is not subject to any restrictions by law, regulation 
or agreement on the counterparty’s ability to use the cash received;  
(b) 
variation margin is calculated and exchanged on a daily basis based on 
mark-to-market valuation of derivatives positions. In order to meet this 
requirement, derivative positions must be valued daily and cash variation 
margin must be transferred at least daily to the counterparty; 
(c) 
the cash variation margin is received in a currency specified in the 
derivatives contract, governing master netting agreement (MNA),16
16  
MNA includes any netting agreement that provides legally enforceable rights of offset and also 
satisfies the criteria for bilateral netting agreements as set out in Attachment H to APS 112. A 
master MNA, which is an overarching agreement that provides a legally enforceable right to net 
across more than one MNA, may be treated as a single MNA.  
 credit 
                                                 
APS 110 – Attachment D - 23 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
support annex to the qualifying MNA or as defined by any netting 
agreement with a central counterparty (CCP);17
17  
CCP has the meaning given in paragraph 8(b) of APS 180.  
 
(d) 
variation margin exchanged is the full amount that would be necessary to 
extinguish the mark-to-market exposure of the derivative subject to the 
threshold and minimum transfer amounts applicable to the counterparty;18
18  
In situations where a margin dispute arises, the amount of non-disputed variation margin that has 
been exchanged can be recognised. 
 
and 
(e) 
derivatives transactions and variation margins are covered by a single MNA 
between the legal entities that are the counterparties in the derivatives 
transaction. The MNA must explicitly stipulate that the counterparties agree 
to settle on a net basis any payment obligations covered by the MNA, taking 
into account any variation margin received or provided if a credit event 
occurs involving either counterparty. 
24. 
If the conditions in paragraph 23 of this Attachment are met and an ADI: 
(a) 
receives cash variation margin from a counterparty, it may reduce the RC 
(but not the PFE component) of the exposure amount of the derivative 
transactions consistent with paragraph 19 of this Attachment; and 
(b) 
provides cash variation margin to a counterparty, it may deduct the resulting 
receivable from its exposure measure, where the cash variation margin has 
been recognised as an asset in accordance with Australian Accounting 
Standards, and instead include the cash variation margin provided in the 
calculation of the RC consistent with paragraph 19 of this Attachment. 
Treatment of clearing services 
25. 
If an ADI acting as a clearing member (CM)19
19  
Clearing member has the meaning given in paragraph 8(c) of APS 180. 
 offers clearing services to clients, 
its trade exposures to the CCP must be included in its exposure measure by 
applying the same treatment as for any other type of derivative transaction. Trade 
exposures to a CCP arise when the ADI is obligated to reimburse the client for 
any losses suffered due to changes in the value of its transactions in the event that 
the CCP defaults.20
20  
For the purposes of paragraphs 25 to 28 of this Attachment, trade exposures includes initial margin 
irrespective of whether or not it is posted in a manner that makes it remote from the insolvency of 
the CCP. 
  
26. 
If an ADI acting as a CM is not contractually obligated to reimburse the client for 
any losses suffered in the event that a QCCP defaults, the ADI may exclude the 
resulting trade exposures to the QCCP from its exposure measure. 
27. 
If a client enters directly into a derivative transaction with a CCP, and an ADI 
acting as a CM guarantees the performance of the client’s transaction to the CCP, 
the ADI must calculate its related leverage ratio exposure resulting from the 
                                                 
APS 110 – Attachment D - 24 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
guarantee as a derivative exposure in accordance with paragraphs 17 to 24 of this 
Attachment, as if it had entered directly into the transaction with the client. 
28. 
If an entity falls within the Level 2 group of the ADI acting as a CM, trades 
between that entity and the ADI are eliminated in the course of consolidation and 
the ADI retains an exposure to the CCP. In this case, the transaction with the CCP 
will be considered proprietary for the ADI acting as a CM, and the exemption set 
out in paragraph 26 of this Attachment will not apply.  
29. 
If an ADI is providing client clearing services, it may use the approach detailed 
in Attachment D to APS 180 to calculate the RC and PFE of the exposure to the 
client. In using this approach, the ADI must only include the portion of initial 
margin received from the client which is subject to appropriate segregation by the 
ADI. 
Additional treatment for written credit derivatives 
30. 
For written credit derivatives, an ADI must apply the additional treatment set out 
in paragraphs 30 to 36 of this Attachment. For the purposes of this Attachment, 
written credit derivative refers to a broad range of credit derivatives through 
which an ADI effectively provides credit protection and is not limited solely to 
credit default swaps and total return swaps.  
31. 
To capture the credit exposure to the underlying reference entity, the effective 
notional amount21
21  
The effective notional amount is obtained by adjusting the notional amount to reflect the true 
exposure of contracts that are leveraged or otherwise enhanced by the structure of the transaction. 
 referenced by a written credit derivative must be included in 
the exposure measure unless: 
(a) 
the written credit derivative is included in a transaction cleared on behalf of 
a client of the ADI acting as a CM; and  
(b) 
the transaction meets the requirements of paragraph 26 of this Attachment 
for the exclusion of trade exposures to the QCCP.  
32. 
The effective notional amount of a written credit derivative may be reduced in 
one or both of the following ways: 
(a) 
by any negative change in the fair value amount that has been incorporated 
into the calculation of Tier 1 Capital with respect to the written credit 
derivatives; and 
(b) 
by the effective notional amount of an offsetting purchased credit derivative 
on the same reference name22
22  
Two reference names are considered identical only if they refer to the same legal entity.  
 provided the conditions set out in paragraph 
33 of this Attachment are satisfied. 
                                                 
 
APS 110 – Attachment D - 25 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 110 – Attachment D - 26 
33. 
An ADI may reduce the effective notional amount through the application of 
offsetting purchased credit derivatives if the following conditions are satisfied: 
(a) 
the credit protection purchased through credit derivatives is otherwise 
subject to the same, or more conservative, material terms as those in the 
corresponding written credit derivative.  This ensures that if an ADI 
provides written credit protection via a credit derivative, it may only 
recognise offsetting from another purchased credit derivative if the 
purchased protection is certain to deliver a payment to the ADI in all 
circumstances; 
(b) 
the remaining maturity of the credit protection purchased through credit 
derivatives is equal to or greater than the remaining maturity of the written 
credit derivatives; 
(c) 
the credit protection purchased through credit derivatives is not purchased 
from a counterparty whose credit quality is highly correlated with the value 
of the reference obligation(i.e. wrong-way risk); 
(d) 
in the event that the effective notional amount of a written credit derivative 
is reduced by any negative change in fair value reflected in the ADI’s Tier 1 
Capital, the effective notional amount of offsetting credit protection 
purchased through credit derivatives must also be reduced by any resulting 
positive change in fair value reflected in Tier 1 Capital; and 
(e) 
the credit protection purchased through credit derivatives is not included in 
a transaction that has been cleared on behalf of a client and for which the 
effective notional amount referenced by the corresponding written credit 
derivative is excluded from the exposure measure under paragraph 26 of 
this Attachment. 
34. 
Credit protection purchased on a pool of reference names may only offset credit 
protection sold on individual reference names if the credit protection purchased 
is economically equivalent to buying protection separately on each of the 
individual names in the pool. If the credit protection purchased does not cover the 
entire pool (i.e. the protection covers only a subset of the pool, as in the case of 
an nth-to-default credit derivative or a securitisation tranche), no offsetting of 
credit protection sold on individual reference names is allowed.  
35. 
Where an ADI purchases credit protection through a total return swap and records 
the net payments received as net income, but does not record the offsetting 
deterioration in the value of the written credit derivative (either through 
reductions in fair value or by an addition to reserves) in Tier 1 Capital, the credit 
protection must not be used to offset the effective notional amounts of the written 
credit derivatives. 
36. 
An ADI may choose to exclude from the netting set for the calculation of PFE the 
portion of a written credit derivative which is not offset in accordance with 
23
                                                 
23  
Material terms include the level of subordination or seniority, optionality, strike price, credit 
events, reference name and any other characteristics relevant to the valuation of the derivative. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 110 – Attachment D - 27 
paragraph 32 of this Attachment, and for which the effective notional amount is 
included in the exposure measure.  
Securities financing transaction exposures 
37. 
For the purpose of calculating the exposure measure, an ADI must apply the 
specific treatment set out in paragraphs 38 to 45 of this Attachment to any SFT 
exposures.  
24
ADI acting as a principal 
38. 
When an ADI is acting as a principal in an SFT, its exposure measure must 
include the sum of the following amounts: 
(a) 
gross SFT assets recognised for accounting purposes  (i.e. with no 
recognition of accounting netting), adjusted as follows: 
(i) 
excluding the value of any securities received under an SFT, where 
the ADI has recognised the securities as an asset on its balance sheet; 
and 
(ii) 
cash payables and cash receivables in SFTs with the same 
counterparty may be measured net if all the following criteria are met: 
(A) transactions have the same explicit final settlement date. 
Transactions with no explicit end date but which can be 
unwound at any time by either party to the transaction are not 
eligible; 
(B) the right to set-off the amount owed to the counterparty with the 
amount owed by the counterparty is legally enforceable both in 
the normal course of business and in the event of the default, 
insolvency or bankruptcy of the counterparty; and 
(C) the counterparties intend to settle net, settle simultaneously, or 
the transactions are subject to a settlement mechanism that 
results in the functional equivalent of net settlement.  If there 
26
25
                                                 
24  
SFT has the meaning given in paragraph 14(aa) of APS 112.  
25  
For SFT assets subject to novation and cleared through QCCPs, ‘gross SFT assets recognised for 
accounting purposes’ are replaced by the final contractual exposure, given that pre-existing 
contracts have been replaced by new legal obligations through the novation process. However, 
ADIs may only net cash receivables and cash payables with a QCCP if the criteria in paragraph 
38(a)(ii) are met. Any other netting permitted by the QCCP is not permitted for the purposes of 
the leverage ratio.  
26  
To achieve such equivalence, both transactions are settled through the same settlement system 
and the settlement arrangements are supported by cash or intraday credit facilities intended to 
ensure that settlement of both transactions will occur by the end of the business day and, any 
issues arising from the securities legs of the SFTs do not interfere with the completion of the net 
settlement of the cash receivables and payables. The failure of any single securities transaction in 
the settlement mechanism may delay settlement of only the matching cash leg or create an 
obligation to the settlement mechanism, supported by an associated credit facility. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
is a failure of the securities leg of a transaction at the end of the 
window for settlement in the settlement mechanism, then this 
transaction and its matching cash leg must be split out from the 
netting set and treated gross; and 
(b) 
a measure of counterparty credit risk calculated as the current exposure 
without a PFE add-on, calculated as follows: 
(i) 
where a qualifying MNA as defined in paragraphs 40 and 41 of this 
Attachment is in place, the current exposure (E*) must be set to the 
greater of zero and the total fair value of securities and cash lent to a 
counterparty for all transactions included in the qualifying MNA 
(∑Ei) less the total fair value of cash and securities received from the 
counterparty for those transactions (∑Ci). This is illustrated in the 
following formula:  
E* = max {0, [∑Ei  - ∑Ci]} 
(ii) 
where no qualifying MNA is in place, the current exposure for 
transactions with a counterparty must be calculated on a transaction 
by transaction basis; that is, each transaction i is treated as its own 
netting set, as shown in the following formula: 
Ei* = max {0, [Ei – Ci]}  
Ei* may be set to zero if: 
(A) Ei is the cash lent to a counterparty; 
(B) this transaction is treated as its own netting set; and 
(C) the associated cash receivable is not eligible for the netting 
treatment in paragraph 38(a) of this Attachment.  
39. 
For the purposes of paragraph 38(b) of this Attachment, ‘counterparty’ includes 
not only the counterparty of the bilateral repurchase transactions, but also triparty 
repurchase agents that receive collateral in deposit and manage the collateral in 
the case of triparty repurchase transactions. Securities deposited at triparty 
repurchase agents are included in the total value of securities and cash lent to a 
counterparty (E) up to the amount effectively lent to the counterparty in a 
repurchase transaction. However, excess collateral that has been deposited at 
triparty agents but that has not been lent out may be excluded. 
40. 
For the purpose of paragraph 38(b), a bilateral netting agreement for covering 
SFTs may be recognised as a qualifying MNA on a counterparty by counterparty 
basis only if it: 
(a) 
is legally enforceable in each relevant jurisdiction upon the occurrence of 
an event of default, regardless of whether the counterparty is insolvent or 
bankrupt; 
APS 110 – Attachment D - 28 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
(b) 
provides the non-defaulting party with the right to terminate and close out 
in a timely manner all transactions under the agreement upon an event of 
default, including in the event of insolvency or bankruptcy of the 
counterparty; 
(c) 
provides for the netting of gains and losses on transactions (including the 
value of any collateral) terminated and closed out under it so that a single 
net amount is owed by one party to the other; and 
(d) 
allows for the prompt liquidation or set-off of collateral in the event of 
default. 
41. 
Netting across SFT positions held in the banking book and trading book will only 
be recognised when the netted transactions meet the conditions set out in 
paragraph 6 of Attachment H to APS 112.  
42. 
Where an ADI applies sale accounting to an SFT in accordance with Australian 
Accounting Standards, it must reverse all sales-related accounting entries, and 
then calculate its exposure as if the SFT had been treated as a financing 
transaction under those standards (i.e. the ADI must include the sum of amounts 
in paragraphs 38(a) and 38(b) of this Attachment for such an SFT) for the 
purposes of determining its exposure measure. 
ADI acting as an agent 
43. 
An ADI acting as an agent in an SFT may apply paragraph 38(b) of this 
Attachment to calculate its exposure measure for the transaction where:  
(a) 
the ADI provides an indemnity or guarantee to a customer or counterparty 
for any difference between the value of the security or cash that the 
customer has lent and the value of collateral that the borrower has provided; 
and 
(b) 
the ADI’s exposure to the transaction is limited to the guaranteed difference 
between the value of the security or cash its customer has lent, and the value 
of the collateral the borrower has provided. 
Where the ADI is further economically exposed (i.e. beyond the guarantee for the 
difference) to the underlying security or cash in the transaction, a further exposure 
equal to the full amount of the security or cash must be included in the exposure 
measure. 
44. 
Where an ADI acting as an agent provides an indemnity or guarantee to both 
parties involved in an SFT (i.e. securities lender and securities borrower), the ADI 
must calculate its exposure measure separately for each party involved in the 
transaction.   
45. 
When an ADI acting as agent in an SFT does not provide an indemnity or 
guarantee to any of the involved parties, the ADI has no exposure to the SFT, and 
is not required to include those SFTs in its exposure measure. 
APS 110 – Attachment D - 29 


--- End of file: APS 110 Capital Adequacy.txt ---

FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 - 1 
 
Prudential Standard APS 112 
Capital Adequacy: Standardised Approach 
to Credit Risk 
Objectives and key requirements of this Prudential 
Standard 
This Prudential Standard requires an authorised deposit-taking institution to hold 
sufficient regulatory capital against its credit risk exposures. 
The key requirements of this Prudential Standard are that an authorised deposit-
taking institution: 
• 
must apply risk weights to its on- and off-balance sheet exposures for capital 
adequacy purposes. Risk weights are broadly aligned with the likelihood of 
counterparty default; and 
• 
may reduce the credit risk capital requirement for its on- and off-balance 
sheet exposures where the exposure is covered by eligible lenders’ mortgage 
insurance, or an eligible credit risk mitigation technique. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 - 2 
Table of Contents 
Authority ........................................................................................................... 3 
Application and commencement ...................................................................... 3 
Interpretation .................................................................................................... 3 
Adjustments and exclusions ............................................................................ 3 
Previous exercise of discretion ........................................................................ 4 
Scope ............................................................................................................... 4 
Definitions ........................................................................................................ 4 
Key principles ................................................................................................... 7 
Risk-weighting approach .................................................................................. 7 
Credit risk mitigation ........................................................................................ 8 
Attachment A – Risk weights for property exposures ....................................... 9 
Attachment B – Risk weights for non-property exposures ............................. 17 
Attachment C – Off-balance sheet commitments ........................................... 27 
Attachment D – Unsettled and failed transactions ......................................... 29 
Attachment E – Defaulted exposures ............................................................. 31 
Attachment F – External credit ratings ........................................................... 32 
Attachment G – Collateralised transactions ................................................... 35 
Attachment H – Netting .................................................................................. 45 
Attachment I – Guarantees ............................................................................ 48 
Attachment J – Credit derivatives .................................................................. 52 
 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 - 3 
Authority 
1. 
This Prudential Standard is made under section 11AF of the Banking Act 1959 
(Banking Act).  
Application and commencement 
2. 
This Prudential Standard applies to all authorised deposit-taking institutions 
(ADIs) with the exception of: 
(a) 
foreign ADIs; and 
(b) 
purchased payment facility providers.  
3. 
A reference to an ADI in this Prudential Standard, unless otherwise indicated, is 
a reference to: 
(a) 
an ADI on a Level 1 basis; and 
(b) 
a group of which an ADI is a member on a Level 2 basis. 
4. 
If an ADI to which this Prudential Standard applies is: 
(a) 
the holding company for a group, the ADI must ensure that the requirements 
in this Prudential Standard are met on a Level 2 basis, where applicable; or 
(b) 
a subsidiary of an authorised non-operating holding company 
(authorised NOHC), the authorised NOHC must ensure that the 
requirements in this Prudential Standard are met on a Level 2 basis, where 
applicable. 
5. 
This Prudential Standard commences on 1 January 2023.  
Interpretation 
6. 
Terms that are defined in Prudential Standard APS 001 Definitions appear in bold 
the first time they are used in this Prudential Standard. 
7. 
Where this Prudential Standard provides for APRA to exercise a power or 
discretion, the power or discretion is to be exercised in writing.  
8. 
In this Prudential Standard, unless the contrary intention appears, a reference to 
an Act, Regulations or Prudential Standard is a reference to the Act, Regulations 
or Prudential Standard as in force from time to time. 
Adjustments and exclusions 
9. 
APRA may adjust or exclude a specific prudential requirement in this Prudential 
Standard in relation to one or more specified ADIs or authorised NOHCs.1 
                                                 
1  
Refer to subsection 11AF(2) of the Banking Act. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 - 4 
Previous exercise of discretion 
10. 
An ADI must contact APRA if it seeks to place reliance, for the purposes of 
complying with this Prudential Standard, on a previous exemption or other 
exercise of discretion by APRA under a previous version of this Prudential 
Standard. 
Scope  
11. 
The following items are excluded from the scope of this Prudential Standard: 
(a) 
assets or investments that are required to be deducted from Common 
Equity Tier 1 Capital, Tier 1 Capital, or Total Capital under Prudential 
Standard APS 111 Capital Adequacy: Measurement of Capital (APS 111); 
(b) 
securitisation exposures that are subject to the requirements of Prudential 
Standard APS 120 Securitisation (APS 120), excluding funding-only or 
synthetic securitisations for which an ADI must include the underlying 
exposures in the pool in its calculation of the Regulatory Capital 
requirement for credit risk under this Prudential Standard; 
(c) 
liabilities of a covered bond special purpose vehicle to an issuing ADI as 
specified in Prudential Standard APS 121 Covered Bonds; and 
(d) 
items that are subject to capital requirements under Prudential Standard 
APS 116 Capital Adequacy: Market Risk that do not have counterparty 
credit risk exposure under Prudential Standard APS 180 Capital Adequacy: 
Counterparty Credit Risk (APS 180). 
12. 
Subject to paragraph 13 of this Prudential Standard, an ADI must apply the 
requirements set out in this Prudential Standard to calculate risk-weighted assets 
(RWA) for any credit exposures of overseas banking subsidiaries that form part 
of the Level 2 group. 
13. 
For the purpose of calculating the Level 2 Regulatory Capital requirement for the 
credit exposures of an overseas banking subsidiary that is prudentially regulated 
by a prescribed New Zealand authority, an ADI must calculate RWA using the 
prescribed New Zealand authority’s equivalent prudential rules as in force from 
time to time.2, 3  
Definitions 
14. 
The following definitions are used in this Prudential Standard: 
(a) 
bank – means an ADI or overseas bank; 
                                                 
2  
prescribed New Zealand authority has the meaning given in subsection 5(1) of the Banking Act. 
3  
For APS 112 purposes, an ADI may exclude credit risk RWA that arise from securities held in 
the trading book when applying the prescribed New Zealand authority’s equivalent prudential 
rules. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 - 5 
(b) 
commitment – has the meaning given in paragraphs 1 to 3 of Attachment C 
to this Prudential Standard; 
(c) 
commodities finance – has the meaning given in paragraph 27(c) of 
Attachment B to this Prudential Standard;  
(d) 
corporate exposure – has the meaning given in paragraph 18 of Attachment 
B to this Prudential Standard and includes general corporate exposures and 
specialised lending exposures; 
(e) 
counterparty credit risk – means the risk that the counterparty to a 
transaction could default before the final settlement of the transaction’s 
cash flows. An economic loss would occur if the transactions, or portfolio 
of transactions, with the counterparty has a positive economic value at the 
time of default; 
(f) 
credit conversion factor (CCF) – means the percentage value used to 
convert an off-balance sheet exposure into an on-balance sheet equivalent; 
(g) 
credit protection – means the extent of credit risk transference from the 
party buying credit protection to the party selling credit protection under 
the terms of a guarantee or credit derivative contract; 
(h) 
defaulted exposure – means a non-performing exposure as defined in 
Prudential Standard APS 220 Credit Risk Management (APS 220);  
(i) 
domestic public sector entity (PSE) – has the meaning given in paragraph 6 
of Attachment B to this Prudential Standard; 
(j) 
eligible bilateral netting agreement – means a netting agreement that meets 
the requirements set out in paragraph 9 of Attachment H to this Prudential 
Standard; 
(k) 
eligible credit risk mitigation (CRM) – means any of the credit risk 
mitigation techniques detailed in Attachments G to J of this Prudential 
Standard; 
(l) 
eligible financial collateral – means collateral listed in paragraphs 14 or 22 
of Attachment G to this Prudential Standard; 
(m) equity exposure – has the meaning given in paragraphs 34 to 37 of 
Attachment B to this Prudential Standard; 
(n) 
general corporate exposure – means a corporate exposure that is not a 
specialised lending exposure; 
(o) 
lenders’ mortgage insurance (LMI) – means mortgage insurance that meets 
the requirements set out in paragraph 15 of Attachment A to this Prudential 
Standard; 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 - 6 
(p) 
loan-to-valuation ratio (LVR) – means a ratio calculated by dividing the 
amount of the loan by the value of the property or properties used to secure 
repayment; 
(q) 
netting set – has the meaning given in APS 180; 
(r) 
non-standard loan – means a property exposure that does not satisfy any of 
the requirements set out in paragraphs 3 to 7 of Attachment A to this 
Prudential Standard, or a loan that has the meaning given in paragraph 19 
of Attachment A to this Prudential Standard;  
(s) 
object finance – has the meaning given in paragraph 27(b) of Attachment B 
to this Prudential Standard; 
(t) 
off-balance sheet exposure – means an exposure which is within the scope 
of Attachment C to this Prudential Standard or APS 180; 
(u) 
over-the-counter (OTC) derivative transaction – means a customised, 
privately negotiated, risk-shifting agreement, the value of which is derived 
from the value of an underlying asset; 
(v) 
overseas bank – means a financial institution incorporated outside of 
Australia, which is not an ADI and: 
(i) 
has the power to accept deposits in the ordinary course of business; 
(ii) 
is supervised by the bank supervisor in its home country; and 
(iii) is subject to substantially the same prudential requirements as ADIs; 
(w) project finance – has the meaning given in paragraph 27(a) of Attachment 
B to this Prudential Standard;  
(x) 
property exposure – has the meaning given in Attachment A to this 
Prudential Standard; 
(y) 
related-party exposure – means the exposure of an ADI to a related entity 
as defined in Prudential Standard APS 222 Associations with Related 
Entities. A related-party exposure would be classified according to the asset 
class definitions in Attachment B of this Prudential Standard. For example, 
if an ADI has an exposure to a related entity that is a corporate counterparty, 
the exposure is classified as a corporate exposure;  
(z) 
risk-weighted assets (RWA) – means the credit exposures of an ADI 
multiplied by a percentage factor, as calculated in accordance with 
paragraphs 19 to 21 of this Prudential Standard; 
(aa) securities financing transaction (SFT) – means a transaction such as a 
repurchase agreement, reverse repurchase agreement or a securities lending 
and borrowing transaction where the value of the transaction depends on 
the market valuation of securities and the transaction is typically subject to 
margin agreements;  
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 - 7 
(bb) small- and medium-sized enterprise (SME) – has the meaning given in 
paragraph 22 of Attachment B to this Prudential Standard;  
(cc) sovereign – has the meaning given in paragraph 3 of Attachment B to this 
Prudential Standard; and 
(dd) specialised lending – has the meaning given in paragraph 26 of Attachment 
B to this Prudential Standard. 
Key principles 
15. 
An ADI must hold Regulatory Capital commensurate with its exposure to credit 
risk, based on the application of specified risk weights and CCFs (where 
applicable) as set out in this Prudential Standard. Where appropriate, an ADI must 
use the ratings of external credit assessment institutions (ECAIs) to determine 
the credit rating grade and risk weight of an exposure, as set out in Attachments 
B and F to this Prudential Standard. 
16. 
An ADI must establish and implement effective internal policies, processes, 
systems and controls to ensure that appropriate risk weights are assigned to its 
credit exposures. 
17. 
An ADI may reduce its credit risk Regulatory Capital requirement through the 
use of LMI or eligible CRM techniques. 
18. 
If an ADI seeks to use LMI or eligible CRM techniques to reduce its Regulatory 
Capital requirements, it must have established and implemented effective 
policies, procedures and systems that meet the requirements set out in this 
Prudential Standard. An ADI’s policies and procedures must also address any 
residual risks such as legal, operational, liquidity and market risks that result from 
its use of CRM. 
Risk-weighting approach 
Risk-weighted on-balance sheet assets 
19. 
An ADI must calculate the RWA of an on-balance sheet exposure by multiplying 
the current book value of the exposure (including accrued interest or revaluations, 
and net of any provisions for defaulted exposures, partial write-off or associated 
depreciation) by the relevant risk weight. 
Risk-weighted off-balance sheet exposures 
20. 
The RWA of a non-SFT off-balance sheet exposure must be calculated by 
applying the following two-step process: 
(a) 
first, the exposure amount or exposure at default (EAD), representing the 
on-balance sheet equivalent amount, must be determined according to:  
(i) 
Attachment C to this Prudential Standard for any commitments; and 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 - 8 
(ii) 
where the ADI is a significant financial institution (within the 
meaning given in Prudential Standard APS 110 Capital Adequacy), 
APS 180 for OTC and exchange-traded derivative transactions or 
long-settlement transactions. Where an ADI uses the adjusted current 
exposure method (CEM) under APS 180 and the transaction is 
collateralised, the ADI may also adjust the credit equivalent amount 
(CEA) by applying the comprehensive approach in Attachment G to 
this Prudential Standard;  
(b) 
second, the resulting exposure amount or EAD must be multiplied by the 
relevant risk weight applicable to the counterparty or exposure type. 
21. 
For SFTs, including securities lending transactions, an ADI must calculate: 
(a) 
RWA arising from its exposure to the SFT counterparty, where EAD is 
calculated in accordance with Attachment G to this Prudential Standard and 
is multiplied by the relevant risk weight applicable to the SFT counterparty; 
and 
(b) 
the capital requirement for the credit risk or market risk inherent in any 
securities the ADI lends or posts as collateral, if that risk remains with the 
ADI. 
Credit risk mitigation 
22. 
Where multiple CRM techniques cover a single exposure, an ADI must divide 
the exposure into portions covered by each CRM technique. The RWA of each 
portion must be calculated separately, and then totalled. If credit protection 
provided by a single protection provider has differing maturities, they must also 
be subdivided into separate protected portions.  
23. 
An ADI must not recognise additional CRM on exposures where the risk weight 
is mapped from an ECAI issue-specific credit rating, and that credit rating already 
incorporates the recognition of CRM. 
24. 
An ADI must not recognise the use of CRM where the credit quality of the 
counterparty has a material positive correlation with the CRM technique used, or 
with any resulting residual risks (e.g. collateral in the form of securities issued by 
the counterparty to the credit exposure is considered to have a material positive 
correlation with the credit quality of the original counterparty).  
25. 
To obtain capital relief through the use of a CRM technique, all documentation 
must be binding on all parties and legally enforceable in all relevant jurisdictions. 
The ADI must have undertaken sufficient legal review to be satisfied of the legal 
enforceability of the CRM technique, and must undertake periodic reviews to 
confirm its ongoing enforceability.  
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment A - 9 
Attachment A – Risk weights for property exposures 
1. 
A property exposure is an exposure that is secured by immovable real property. 
An ADI must risk weight its property exposures according to the requirements 
detailed in this Attachment, with the exception of defaulted property exposures, 
which must be risk-weighted in accordance with Attachment E to this Prudential 
Standard. 
Standard property loans 
2. 
A loan must meet all of the requirements set out in paragraphs 3 to 7 of this 
Attachment to be classified as standard. 
3. 
An ADI must have unequivocal enforcement rights over the mortgaged property 
at all times, including a right to possession and power of sale in the event of 
default by the borrower. An ADI must reasonably consider that it would be able 
to realise the value of the property provided as security within a reasonable 
timeframe. 
4. 
An ADI’s exposure must be secured by a registered first mortgage over the 
property, or by a registered second mortgage which satisfies the following 
conditions: 
(a) 
the ADI must obtain the written consent of the first mortgagee for the 
second mortgage, and confirm the maximum outstanding amount of the 
loan secured by the first mortgage (including the maximum drawdown or 
limit of the facility) for LVR purposes; 
(b) 
the ADI must ensure that the amount secured by the first mortgage cannot 
be increased without being subordinate to the second mortgage;  
(c) 
the ADI, as second mortgagee, must be able to exercise its power of sale 
over the property independently of any other mortgagee over the property; 
and 
(d) 
where the sale of the property is not carried out by means of a public 
auction, the first mortgagee must be required to take reasonable steps to 
obtain a fair market value, or the best price that may be obtained in the 
circumstances, when exercising any power of sale (i.e. it is not possible for 
the first mortgagee to sell the property on its own at a discounted value to 
the detriment of the ADI). 
5. 
An ADI must, prior to loan approval, appropriately document, assess and verify 
the ability of the borrower to meet their repayment obligations. This must, at a 
minimum, include:  
(a) 
consideration of the impact of higher interest rates on the ability of the 
borrower to repay;  
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment A - 10 
(b) 
the application of the assessment in paragraph 5(a) of this Attachment to 
the loan being assessed for approval and all existing and ongoing debt 
commitments of the borrower(s), both secured and unsecured; 
(c) 
for interest-only loans secured by residential property, an assessment of 
serviceability for the specific term over which principal-and-interest 
repayments apply, excluding the interest-only period; and 
(d) 
where the repayment of a commercial property loan is dependent on the 
cash flows generated by the property through rental income, an assessment 
of the tenancy profile relative to the maturity of the loan. 
Where an ADI’s assessment does not result in a positive determination of the 
borrower’s ability to meet their repayment obligations, an ADI must classify the 
loan as non-standard.  
6. 
An ADI must appropriately value any property offered as security in accordance 
with paragraph 11 of this Attachment. With the exception of land acquisition, 
development and construction (ADC) exposures, the value of the property must 
not depend materially on the performance of the borrower.  
7. 
All of the information required at loan origination and for monitoring purposes 
must be accurately documented and readily accessible to the ADI, including 
information on the ability of the borrower to repay and on the valuation of the 
property.  
8. 
Property exposures that were originated prior to 1 January 2023, with no material 
change to loan terms and conditions subsequent to this date, do not need to satisfy 
the criteria set out in paragraph 5 of this Attachment to be classified as standard 
loans. 
Loan-to-valuation ratio 
9. 
The components of LVR must be prudently calculated in accordance with the 
requirements set out in paragraphs 10 and 11 of this Attachment.  
10. 
The amount of the loan includes the outstanding loan amount (including accrued 
interest and fees) and any undrawn committed amount (as set out in Attachment 
C to this Prudential Standard), calculated gross of any provisions for defaulted 
exposures and other credit risk mitigants. If an ADI provides: 
(a) 
multiple loans secured by the same property and they are sequential in 
ranking order (i.e. there is no intermediate interest from another lender), the 
loan amounts must be aggregated and treated as a single exposure for the 
purpose of calculating the LVR; or 
(b) 
a loan that is secured by a second mortgage, the outstanding amount of the 
loan must be calculated as the sum of all claims on the borrower secured by 
both the first and second mortgages over the same property for the purpose 
of calculating the LVR. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment A - 11 
When calculating LVR, the loan amount will reduce if the loan amortises.  
11. 
The value of the property must be appraised independently using prudently 
conservative criteria, consistent with the requirements set out in APS 220.4 If a 
market value can be determined, the valuation must not be higher than the market 
value.5 For the purpose of calculating the property value: 
(a) 
the value of the property at origination must be maintained, unless: 
(i) 
an updated valuation is obtained as part of a new loan application 
process in relation to the mortgaged property; 
(ii) 
an event occurs that results in a likely permanent reduction in the 
property’s value; or 
(iii) modifications are made to the property or contractual tenancy 
arrangements, that unequivocally increase its value, and an updated 
valuation is obtained which confirms the increase in value;  
(b) 
where a loan is secured by multiple properties, an ADI must use the 
aggregate value of the mortgaged properties for the purpose of calculating 
LVR; however, where a residential property exposure is secured by both 
residential and commercial properties, an ADI must apply a 40 per cent 
haircut to the value of any commercial property included in calculating 
LVR; and  
(c) 
for a reverse mortgage, where a borrower has been guaranteed a minimum 
share in the future sale proceeds of a mortgaged property, the calculation of 
the LVR for regulatory purposes must be adjusted by reducing the value of 
the mortgaged property by the quarantined percentage share.  
12. 
For exposures secured by commercial property that were originated prior to 1 
January 2023, an ADI may use the current valuation, rather than the value of the 
property at origination, for the purpose of paragraph 11(a) of this Attachment. 
Credit risk mitigation 
13. 
An ADI may use eligible CRM techniques to reduce the exposure amount of a 
property exposure, but the LVR band and applicable risk weight must be 
determined before the application of the relevant CRM technique.  
Residential property 
14. 
A residential property exposure is an exposure where the predominant security is 
an immovable property that has the nature of a dwelling, and satisfies all 
                                                 
4  
The valuation must be done independently from the ADI’s mortgage acquisition, loan processing 
and loan decision process. 
5  
Where the loan is financing the purchase of property, the value of the property for LVR purposes 
must not be higher than the effective purchase price. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment A - 12 
applicable laws and regulations enabling the property to be occupied for housing 
purposes. Residential property includes the following exposure types: 
(a) 
‘Owner-occupied’ refers to a loan for the purpose of housing, where the 
funds are used for a residential property that is occupied, or to be occupied, 
by the borrower(s) as their principal place of residence. Where the loan is 
for a residential property that is different to the residential property against 
which the loan is secured, this definition refers to the occupation status of 
the residential property for which the loan has been obtained (not the 
occupation status of the residential property used as security). It includes: 
(i) 
a dwelling or residential land that is vacant while under construction, 
but that the borrower intends to occupy as a principal place of 
residence; and 
(ii) 
a part-time residence that is the principal place of residence of the 
borrower(s). 
Where finance is to be used for more than one purpose (e.g. owner-
occupied, investment or non-housing purposes), the entire amount of the 
finance must be classified according to the predominant purpose (i.e. the 
purpose for which the largest share of the funds will be used). Where there 
is any doubt or ambiguity about whether a loan is for an owner-occupied or 
investment purpose, the loan must be treated as an ‘other standard 
residential property’ exposure.  
(b) 
‘Principal-and-interest’ refers to a loan on which interest is paid and 
principal is automatically amortised over the life of the loan.  
(c) 
‘Other standard residential property’ refers to any of the following 
exposures: 
(i) 
loans for a purpose other than owner-occupation, including for 
investment or business purposes; 
(ii) 
interest-only loans with an interest-only term of five years or less, 
where only interest is paid and principal is not automatically 
amortised; or 
(iii) other loans that do not meet both of the criteria in paragraphs 14(a) 
and 14(b) of this Attachment. 
Lenders’ mortgage insurance 
15. 
An ADI may reduce its capital requirement through the application of LMI, where 
the insurance: 
(a) 
provides cover for all losses up to at least 40 per cent of the higher of the 
original loan amount and outstanding loan amount; and 
(b) 
is provided by an eligible lenders’ mortgage insurer, which means that: 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment A - 13 
(i) 
for the purposes of Level 1 Regulatory Capital, the lenders’ mortgage 
insurer must be regulated by APRA; and 
(ii) 
for the purposes of Level 2 Regulatory Capital, in the case of overseas 
subsidiaries of Australian ADIs, the lenders’ mortgage insurer is 
regulated by an overseas prudential regulator. 
Risk weights for standard residential property loans 
16. 
An ADI must apply the risk weights in Table 1 to its residential property 
exposures that satisfy all of the conditions of a standard loan as set out in 
paragraphs 3 to 7 of this Attachment, based on their classification as an owner-
occupied principal-and-interest or other standard residential property exposure, 
the application of eligible LMI and the exposure’s LVR. 
Table 1 
Risk weights for standard loans 
LVR (%) 
Risk weight (%) 
≤ 50 
50.01 
- 60 
60.01 
- 70 
70.01 
- 80 
80.01 
- 90 
90.01 
- 100 
> 100 
Owner-occupied 
principal-and-
interest 
LMI 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
55 
70 
No 
LMI 
50 
70 
85 
Other standard 
residential 
property 
LMI 
25 
30 
40 
45 
50 
70 
85 
No 
LMI 
65 
85 
105 
 
17. 
An ADI may apply a risk weight of 35 per cent to residential property exposures 
that satisfy the conditions for inclusion within the First Home Loan Deposit 
Scheme or the Family Home Guarantee Scheme, and in respect of which the 
National Housing Finance and Investment Corporation has issued a guarantee 
certificate to the ADI. This capital treatment ceases to apply when: 
(a) 
the guarantee certificate expires or is released in accordance with the terms 
of the Deed of Guarantee in respect of the First Home Loan Deposit Scheme 
or the Family Home Guarantee Scheme; or 
(b) 
APRA determines that it no longer applies. 
APRA may determine that this treatment may also be applied to a similar 
guarantee scheme that is offered by the Australian Government or an Australian 
State or Territory government. 
Risk weights for non-standard residential property loans 
18. 
An exposure that is secured by residential property but does not meet any of the 
requirements set out in paragraphs 3 to 7 of this Attachment, must be classified 
as a non-standard loan.  
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment A - 14 
19. 
The following exposures must also be classified as non-standard loans: 
(a) 
interest only loans with an LVR greater than 80 per cent and an interest-
only term that is specified in the loan contract as greater than five years or 
is of unspecified duration. The non-standard treatment applies while the 
loan remains on interest-only repayment terms. Exposures that meet the 
above criteria but are predominantly for business purposes may be 
excluded; 
(b) 
reverse mortgages, which are exposures that do not require principal-and-
interest payments until termination of the facility. A risk weight of 50 per 
cent may only be applied to reverse mortgages where the criteria in 
paragraphs 3, 4, 6 and 7 of this Attachment are satisfied in addition to the 
LVR criteria in Table 2; 
(c) 
shared equity mortgages, where both the borrower and lender share in any 
gain or loss in the value of the mortgaged property; and 
(d) 
loans to self-managed superannuation funds. 
20. 
An ADI must apply the risk weights in Table 2 to its non-standard loans secured 
by residential property, based on LVR (where applicable). 
Table 2 
Risk weights for non-standard loans 
LVR (%) 
Risk weight (%) 
≤ 60 
> 60 
Reverse mortgages 
50 
100 
All other non-standard loans 
100 
 
21. 
A loan secured by residential property which does not meet the criteria set out in 
paragraph 5 of this Attachment, and consequently must be classified as a non-
standard loan, may be reclassified as a standard loan where the loan has been 
performing consecutively for the previous 36 months.  
Commercial property 
22. 
A commercial property exposure is a property exposure that is not a residential 
property exposure as defined in paragraph 14 of this Attachment, and is not land 
acquisition, development and construction as defined in paragraphs 27 and 28 of 
this Attachment. 
Dependent on property cash flows  
23. 
If the prospects for repayment of the exposure depend primarily on the cash flows 
generated by the asset or other real estate assets owned by the borrower, an ADI 
must apply the risk weights in Table 3 based on LVR and the classification of the 
loan as standard or non-standard.  
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment A - 15 
Table 3 
Risk weights for commercial property exposures – dependent on 
property cash flows 
LVR (%) 
Risk weight (%) 
≤ 60 
60.01 - 80 
> 80 
Standard 
70 
90 
110 
Non-standard 
150 
 
Not dependent on property cash flows  
24. 
If the servicing and repayment of a commercial property exposure does not meet 
the criteria for dependence as set out in paragraph 23 of this Attachment, an ADI 
must apply the risk weights in Table 4 based on counterparty type, LVR and the 
classification of the loan as standard or non-standard.  
Table 4 
Risk weights for commercial property exposures – not dependent on 
property cash flows 
Counterparty 
Risk weight (%) 
LVR ≤ 60 
LVR > 60 or non-
standard 
Rated corporate 
60, or 
the risk weights in Table 10 
Risk weights in Table 10 
All other 
counterparties 
60 
According to applicable risk 
weight in Attachment B 
 
25. 
An exposure may be classified as ‘commercial property exposures - not 
dependent on property cash flows’ where an ADI has recourse to a borrower that 
meets all of the following criteria: 
(a) 
the borrower is a corporate entity that is managed by a recognised, 
professional and reputable management team; 
(b) 
the ADI’s exposure to the borrower is not specifically or substantially 
financing limited recourse development projects; 
(c) 
the borrower has greater than $250 million in tangible assets, to which the 
ADI has unconditional recourse; 
(d) 
real estate assets are sufficiently diversified such that: 
(i) 
no single asset represents greater than 25 per cent of the borrower’s 
real estate portfolio by value; and 
(ii) 
real estate assets are not concentrated in one particular specific 
geographic location; and 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment A - 16 
(e) 
for real estate operators or investors, tenants are sufficiently diversified 
such that no single tenant represents: 
(i) 
greater than 25 per cent of portfolio net rental income for portfolios 
of retail shopping centres that typically require significant anchor 
tenants to attract specialty tenants; and 
(ii) 
greater than 10 per cent of portfolio net rental income for all other 
portfolios of real estate assets (e.g. commercial offices, industrial 
buildings, hotels), with the exception of Government tenants. 
26. 
Where an ADI has an exposure to commercial property that is used predominantly 
for forest or agricultural purposes, it may classify the exposure as ‘not dependent’, 
unless the property has been acquired specifically for lease or resale, and the 
servicing of the debt is dependent on such lease or resale (or the lease or resale of 
other properties). 
Land acquisition, development and construction 
27. 
Land acquisition, development and construction (ADC) refers to property 
exposures where the security for the loan predominantly relates to any of the land 
acquisition for development and construction purposes, or development and 
construction of any residential or commercial property. 
28. 
All property exposures where the predominant property security is not fully 
completed must be included as ADC unless: 
(a) 
the property is used predominantly for forest or agricultural purposes; or 
(b) 
the loan is secured by residential property under construction, or by land 
upon which residential property will be constructed, where the property will 
be the primary residence of the borrower.  
29. 
An ADI may apply a risk weight of 100 per cent to its ADC exposures secured 
by residential property if the following conditions are met: 
(a) 
the exposure meets all of the requirements in paragraphs 3, 4, 6 and 7 of 
this Attachment;  
(b) 
total debt to qualifying development costs are less than 75 per cent, where 
debt includes all debt facilities held by the borrower in relation to the 
underlying property; 
(c) 
where the exposure to the borrower is greater than $5 million in aggregate 
for a single development, qualifying pre-sales for the underlying property 
are at least equal to 100 per cent of the total debt; and 
(d) 
the ADI has a policy that defines qualifying pre-sales and qualifying 
development costs for the purpose of meeting the requirements under 
paragraph 29 of this Attachment.   
30. 
An ADI must apply a risk weight of 150 per cent to all other ADC exposures. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment B - 17 
Attachment B – Risk weights for non-property 
exposures 
1. 
An ADI must risk-weight all exposures that are not property exposures according 
to the requirements detailed in this Attachment, with the exception of:  
(a) 
unsettled and failed transactions, which must be risk-weighted in 
accordance with Attachment D to this Prudential Standard; and  
(b) 
defaulted exposures, which must be risk-weighted in accordance with 
Attachment E to this Prudential Standard. 
2. 
Where this Attachment requires an ADI to assign risk weights based on external 
credit ratings, an ADI must also comply with the requirements set out in 
Attachment F to this Prudential Standard.  
Sovereign exposures 
3. 
A sovereign exposure includes:  
(a) 
all exposures to Australian and overseas central and subnational 
governments, where a subnational government is defined as a government 
of a geographically defined part of a state which has powers to raise revenue 
and borrow money; 
(b) 
all exposures to the Reserve Bank of Australia and overseas central banks, 
where a central bank is defined as an entity which is responsible for 
overseeing and implementing the monetary policy of a state or group of 
states; and 
(c) 
all exposures to institutions and multilateral development banks eligible for 
a zero per cent risk weight.6 
4. 
An ADI must apply the risk weights in Table 5 to its sovereign exposures, based 
on the external credit rating of the sovereign, with the exception of those 
sovereign exposures eligible for a zero per cent risk weight under paragraph 3(c) 
of this Attachment. 
                                                 
6  
For the purpose of paragraph 3(c) of this Attachment, the following institutions may be risk-
weighted at zero per cent: the Bank for International Settlements; the International Monetary 
Fund; the European Central Bank; the European Union; the European Stability Mechanism; the 
European Financial Stability Facility; the World Bank Group comprising the International Bank 
for Reconstruction and Development, the International Finance Corporation, the Multilateral 
Investment Guarantee Agency and the International Development Association; the Asian 
Development Bank; the African Development Bank; the European Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development; the Inter-American Development Bank; the European Investment Bank; the 
European Investment Fund; the Nordic Investment Bank; the Caribbean Development Bank; the 
Islamic Development Bank; the Council of Europe Development Bank; the International Finance 
Facility for Immunization; and the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank.  
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment B - 18 
Table 5 
Risk weights for sovereign exposures 
Credit rating 
grade 
1 
2 
3 
4, 5 
6 
Unrated 
Risk weight (%) 
0 
20 
50 
100 
150 
100 
 
5. 
Exposures to the Australian Government and Reserve Bank of Australia that are 
denominated and funded in Australian dollars may be risk-weighted at zero per 
cent.  
Domestic public sector entities 
6. 
An ADI must apply the risk weights in Table 6 to its exposures to domestic public 
sector entities (PSEs) that do not meet the definition of a sovereign exposure, 
based on the external credit rating of the domestic PSE.  
Table 6 
Risk weights for domestic PSEs 
Credit rating 
grade 
1 
2 
3 
4, 5 
6 
Unrated 
Risk weight (%) 
20 
50 
50 
100 
150 
50 
 
Bank exposures 
7. 
An exposure to a bank counterparty includes all exposures, other than equity or 
subordinated debt, to an ADI or overseas bank. It includes any exposures to 
multilateral development banks that are not eligible to be risk-weighted at zero 
per cent in accordance with paragraph 3(c) of this Attachment. 
8. 
An ADI must apply the risk weights in Table 7 to its bank exposures, based on 
the external credit rating of the bank.  
Table 7 
Risk weights for bank exposures 
Credit rating 
grade (long-term) 
1 
2 
3 
4, 5 
6 
Unrated 
Risk weight (%) 
(short-term 
exposure) 
20 
20 
20 
50 
150 
20 
Risk weight (%) 
(long-term 
exposure) 
20 
30 
50 
100 
150 
50 
 
9. 
For the purpose of Table 7, an ADI may apply the short-term exposure risk 
weights to its bank exposures, where the exposure:  
(a) 
has an original maturity of three months or less; or 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment B - 19 
(b) 
arises from the movement of goods across national borders, with an original 
maturity of six months or less.7 
10. 
Unrated bank exposures must be risk-weighted as the higher of: 
(a) 
20 per cent for short-term exposures and 50 per cent for long-term 
exposures; and 
(b) 
the risk weight applicable to exposures to the sovereign of the country 
where the bank counterparty is incorporated.  
The sovereign risk-weight floor does not apply to short-term self-liquidating, 
trade-related contingent items that arise from the movement of goods.8  
11. 
An ADI must apply the risk weights in Table 8 to short-term bank exposures with 
an issue-specific external credit rating.  
Table 8 
Risk weights for bank exposures (short-term issue-specific credit 
ratings) 
Credit rating grade 
(short term) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Risk weight (%) 
20 
50 
100 
150 
 
12. 
If an ADI has a bank exposure with an issue-specific short-term external credit 
rating that maps to a credit rating grade:  
(a) 
that requires a higher risk weight than would be assigned under Table 7 
(short-term exposure), then an ADI must risk-weight the exposure in 
accordance with Table 8 and not Table 7; 
(b) 
of 2 or 3 under Table 8, then all unrated short-term exposures to that 
counterparty must be risk-weighted at 100 per cent; and  
(c) 
of 4 under Table 8, then all unrated exposures to that counterparty, whether 
they are short-term or long-term exposures, must be risk-weighted at 150 
per cent.  
13. 
When assigning risk-weights to bank exposures based on external credit ratings, 
an ADI must not use ratings that incorporate assumptions of implicit government 
support.  
                                                 
7  
This may include on-balance sheet exposures such as loans and off-balance sheet exposures such 
as self-liquidating trade-related contingent items. 
8  
For this purpose, short-term refers to an exposure with a maturity less than 12 months. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment B - 20 
Covered bonds 
14. 
An ADI may apply the risk weights in Table 9 to its covered bond exposures with 
an issue-specific external credit rating, where the requirements set out in 
paragraphs 15 and 16 of this Attachment are met. 
Table 9 
Risk weights for rated covered bond exposures 
Credit rating 
grade 
1 
2, 3 
4, 5 
6 
Risk weight (%) 
10 
20 
50 
100 
 
15. 
An ADI may apply the risk weights in Table 9 where: 
(a) 
the cover pool includes only the following assets: 
(i) 
loans to, or guaranteed by, sovereigns or domestic PSEs; 
(ii) 
loans to, or guaranteed by, banks that qualify for a risk weight of 30 
per cent or lower in accordance with paragraphs 8 to 10 of this 
Attachment; however, such assets cannot exceed 15 per cent of the 
cover pool; 
(iii) residential property exposures that meet the requirements in 
paragraphs 3 to 7 of Attachment A to this Prudential Standard for 
covered bonds issued in Australia, and as defined by the relevant 
supervisory authority for covered bonds issued in other jurisdictions, 
with an LVR equal to or less than 80 per cent; and 
(iv) commercial property exposures that meet the requirements in 
paragraphs 3 to 7 of Attachment A to this Prudential Standard for 
covered bonds issued in Australia, and as defined by the relevant 
supervisory authority for covered bonds issued in other jurisdictions, 
with an LVR equal to or less than 60 per cent; 
(b) 
the nominal value of the cover pool exceeds the nominal outstanding value 
of the covered bond by at least 10 per cent; and 
(c) 
the conditions set out in this paragraph are satisfied at the time of issuance, 
and at all times throughout the remaining maturity of the covered bond.  
16. 
An ADI must be able to demonstrate to APRA that, at a minimum, the following 
information is available to the ADI on at least a semi-annual basis: 
(a) 
the value of the cover pool and outstanding covered bonds; 
(b) 
the geographical distribution and type of cover assets, loan size, interest rate 
and currency risks; 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment B - 21 
(c) 
the maturity structure of assets in the cover pool and of the covered bonds; 
and 
(d) 
the percentage of loans that are 90 days or more past-due. 
17. 
Where a covered bond is unrated or does not meet the requirements set out in 
paragraphs 15 and 16 of this Attachment, an ADI must treat the covered bond as 
a bank exposure and apply the risk weights in Table 7.  
Corporate exposures 
18. 
An exposure to a corporate counterparty includes all exposures to incorporated 
entities, associations, partnerships, proprietorships, trusts, funds and other entities 
that do not meet the definition of any other asset class. Exposures to financial 
institutions, excluding banks but including insurance companies or securities 
companies, must be treated as corporate exposures. Exposures to equity or 
subordinated debt, or exposures through a third party as detailed in paragraph 41 
of this Attachment, must not be included as corporate exposures. 
General corporate – rated exposures 
19. 
An ADI must apply the risk weights in Table 10 to its general corporate exposures 
with an external credit rating. 
Table 10 Risk weights for general corporate exposures 
Credit rating grade 
(long-term) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5, 6 
Risk weight (%) 
20 
50 
75 
100 
150 
 
20. 
An ADI must apply the risk weights in Table 11 to short-term general corporate 
exposures with an issue-specific external credit rating. 
Table 11 Risk weights for general corporate exposures (short-term issue-
specific credit ratings) 
Credit rating grade 
(short-term) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Risk weight (%) 
20 
50 
100 
150 
 
21. 
If an ADI has a general corporate exposure with an issue-specific short-term 
external credit rating mapping to a credit rating grade of 4 under Table 11, then 
all unrated exposures to that counterparty, whether they are short-term or long-
term exposures, must be risk-weighted at 150 per cent.  
General corporate – unrated small- and medium-sized enterprise exposures 
22. 
An exposure to an SME is an exposure to a corporate counterparty with total 
consolidated annual revenue of less than $75 million. Where an ADI has an 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment B - 22 
exposure to an SME that is part of a corporate group, it may be treated as an SME 
exposure provided the total consolidated annual revenue for the group is less than 
$75 million. Where a corporate counterparty’s total consolidated annual revenue 
cannot be determined, and the exposure is less than $5 million, the ADI may treat 
the exposure as SME. 
23. 
An ADI must apply the risk weights in Table 12 to its unrated SME exposures.  
Table 12 Risk weights for unrated SME exposures 
 
Risk weight (%) 
SME retail 
75 
SME corporate  
85 
 
24. 
To be risk-weighted as SME retail, the following criteria must be satisfied: 
(a) 
the exposure is in the form of a small business lending facility or 
commitment. Derivatives and other securities such as bonds and equities, 
and exposures secured by residential property are excluded from this 
category; and 
(b) 
the maximum aggregated exposure to the SME counterparty is less than 
$1.5 million. For this purpose: 
(i) 
aggregated exposure means the gross amount, excluding the 
application of any credit risk mitigation. For off-balance sheet 
exposures, the gross amount must be calculated after applying CCFs; 
and 
(ii) 
the SME counterparty means either a single SME, or where the SME 
forms part of a corporate group, the broader group.  
General corporate – other  
25. 
An ADI must risk-weight all other unrated general corporate exposures at 100 per 
cent. 
Specialised lending 
26. 
A corporate exposure must be classified as a specialised lending exposure if it 
possesses the following characteristics, either in legal form or economic 
substance: 
(a) 
the exposure satisfies the definition of object finance, project finance or 
commodities finance as set out in paragraph 27 of this Attachment, is not a 
property exposure and is not secured by derivatives or other securities such 
as bonds or equities; 
(b) 
the exposure is typically to an entity that was created specifically to finance 
or operate physical assets; 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment B - 23 
(c) 
other than the income that it receives from the assets being financed, the 
borrowing entity has little or no other material assets or activities, and 
therefore has little or no independent capacity to repay the obligation; 
(d) 
the terms of the obligation give the ADI a substantial degree of control over 
the assets and the income that it generates; and 
(e) 
as a result of the characteristics detailed in 26(a) to 26(d) of this paragraph, 
the primary source of repayment of the obligation is the income generated 
by the assets rather than the independent capacity of a broader commercial 
enterprise.  
27. 
The specialised lending asset class includes the following three sub-classes:  
(a) 
project finance, refers to the method of funding in which the lender looks 
primarily to the revenues generated by a single project, both as the source 
of repayment and as security for the loan; 
(b) 
object finance, refers to the method of funding the acquisition of equipment 
where the repayment of the loan is dependent on the cash flows generated 
by the specific assets that have been financed and pledged or assigned to 
the lender; and  
(c) 
commodities finance, refers to short-term lending to finance reserves, 
inventories, or receivables of exchange-traded commodities, where the loan 
will be repaid from the proceeds of the sale of the commodity and the 
borrower has no independent capacity to repay the loan.  
28. 
Where an issue-specific external credit rating is available for a specialised lending 
exposure, an ADI must apply the risk weights in Table 10.  
29. 
An ADI must apply the risk weights in Table 13 to its unrated specialised lending 
exposures, including any exposures with an issuer-specific external credit rating. 
Table 13 Risk weights for unrated specialised lending exposures 
 
Risk weight (%) 
Project finance 
110 
Object and commodities finance 
100 
 
Retail exposures 
30. 
A retail exposure is any exposure to one or more individuals (that is, natural 
persons), that is not a property exposure or margin lending exposure. 
31. 
An ADI must apply the risk weights in Table 14 to its retail exposures, based on 
the product type. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment B - 24 
Table 14 Risk weights for retail exposures 
 
Risk weight (%) 
Credit card exposures 
75 
Other retail exposures 
100 
 
Margin lending exposures 
32. 
An ADI must apply a risk weight of 20 per cent to margin lending exposures 
secured by eligible financial collateral. Where a margin loan is secured by other 
collateral, an ADI must apply a risk weight of 100 per cent to its exposure. 
Subordinated debt 
33. 
Subordinated debt includes any facility that is expressly subordinated to another 
facility, or has the effect of conveying economic subordination to another 
facility.9 Subordinated debt that is not required to be deducted from regulatory 
capital under APS 111 must be risk weighted at 150 per cent.  
Equity 
34. 
Equity exposures must be defined on the basis of the economic substance of the 
instrument. Equity exposures include both direct and indirect ownership 
interests,10 whether voting or non-voting, in the assets and income of entities, 
including commercial enterprises and financial institutions. An instrument is 
considered to be an equity exposure if it meets the following criteria:  
(a) 
it is irredeemable, in that the return of invested funds can be achieved only 
by the sale of the investment, the sale of the rights to the investment or by 
the liquidation of the issuer;  
(b) 
it does not embody an obligation of the issuer; and 
(c) 
it conveys a residual claim on the assets or income of the issuer. 
35. 
Debt obligations and other securities, units in trusts, derivatives or other 
instruments which are structured for the purpose, or have the effect, of conveying 
the economic substance of equity ownership must be treated as equity exposures. 
This includes options and warrants on equities and short positions in equity 
securities. In addition, if a debt instrument is convertible into equity at the option 
of an ADI, it should be treated by the ADI as equity on conversion. If such an 
                                                 
9  
Subordinated debt which is structured for the purpose, or has the effect, of conveying the 
economic substance of equity ownership, must be treated as an equity exposure.  
10  
Indirect equity interests include holdings of derivative instruments tied to equity interests and 
holdings in corporations, partnerships, limited liability companies, trusts or other types of entities 
that issue ownership interests and are engaged principally in the business of investing in equity 
instruments. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment B - 25 
instrument is convertible at the option of the issuer or automatically by the terms 
of the instrument, it should be treated by the ADI as equity from inception. 
36. 
Equities that are recorded as a loan but arise from a debt/equity swap made as 
part of the orderly realisation or restructuring of the debt must be treated as an 
equity exposure. 
37. 
Instruments with a return directly linked to equities must be treated as equity 
exposures.  
38. 
An ADI must risk-weight equity exposures that are not required to be deducted 
from Regulatory Capital under APS 111 at: 
(a) 
250 per cent if the equity exposure is listed on a recognised exchange, or 
where the equity exposure is to the ADI’s banking or insurance subsidiary 
at Level 1;11 and 
(b) 
400 per cent if the equity exposure is not listed on a recognised exchange.  
Leases 
39. 
Lease exposures include all lease and asset finance exposures, irrespective of the 
counterparty type, and include exposures generated by the leasing of right-of-use 
assets. For lease exposures, excluding residual value risk, an ADI must apply the 
risk weight of the counterparty, as specified in this Attachment.  
40. 
Where an ADI is exposed to residual value risk, such as when it acts as the lessor 
in operating leases, it must measure the aggregate residual value and apply the 
risk weights in Table 15 to the residual value of its leased assets. 
Table 15 Risk weights for residual value under lease exposures 
 
Risk weight (%) applying 
to the portion of aggregate 
residual value ≤ 10% of 
Tier 1 capital  
Risk weight (%) applying 
to the portion of aggregate 
residual value > 10% of 
Tier 1 capital 
Exposures to 
residual value 
100 
250 
 
Exposures through a third party 
41. 
An ADI must apply a risk weight of 150 per cent to credit exposures originated 
through a third party, where the ADI: 
(a) 
does not undertake the credit assessment and approval of the underlying 
borrower under its own credit risk policies and processes;  
                                                 
11  
The risk-weighting of equity exposures in banking or insurance subsidiaries at Level 1 is subject 
to the deduction threshold detailed in Attachment D to APS 111.  
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment B - 26 
(b) 
is unable to administer the workout or default processes; and 
(c) 
does not have direct recourse to the third party or underlying borrower in 
the event of default. 
The risk weight prescribed in this paragraph must be applied to all such 
arrangements irrespective of the characterisation of the third party or underlying 
borrower. 
Other exposures 
42. 
An ADI must apply the risk weights in Table 16 to all other exposures that are 
not property exposures or included within one of the other asset classes specified 
in this Attachment. 
Table 16 Risk weights for other exposures 
 
Risk weight (%) 
Cash owned and held at the ADI or in transit 
0 
Gold bullion held at the ADI or held in another ADI on an 
allocated basis, to the extent the gold bullion assets are 
backed by gold bullion liabilities 
0 
Cash items in the process of collection (e.g. cheques, draft 
and other items drawn on banks that are payable 
immediately upon presentation and that are in the process of 
collection) 
20 
Investments in premises, plant and equipment, and all other 
fixed assets 
100 
All other exposures not specified elsewhere 
100 
 
Risk weight multiplier for certain exposures with currency 
mismatch 
43. 
For exposures originated after 1 January 2023, an ADI must apply a 1.5 times 
multiplier to the applicable risk weight for any unhedged retail or residential 
property exposure to individuals, where the lending currency differs from the 
currency of the borrower’s source of income.  
44. 
An unhedged exposure is an exposure to a borrower that has no natural or 
financial hedge against the foreign exchange risk resulting from the currency 
mismatch between the currency of the borrower’s income and the currency of the 
loan. A natural hedge exists where the borrower receives foreign currency income 
that matches the currency of a given loan. A financial hedge generally includes a 
legal contract with a financial institution. For the purpose of the application of the 
multiplier, an ADI may only treat an exposure as hedged where the natural or 
financial hedge covers at least 90 per cent of the loan repayment amount.  
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment C - 27 
Attachment C – Off-balance sheet commitments 
1. 
A commitment is any arrangement that has been offered by the ADI and accepted 
by the borrower to extend credit, purchase assets or issue credit substitutes. It 
includes SFTs. 
2. 
A commitment includes any arrangement that can be unconditionally cancelled 
by the ADI at any time without prior notice to the borrower. It also includes any 
such arrangement that can be cancelled by the ADI if conditions set out in the 
facility documentation are not met, including conditions that must be met by the 
borrower or third parties (conditions precedent) prior to any initial or subsequent 
drawdown under the arrangement.  
3. 
Where an ADI enters into an arrangement that meets all of the following 
conditions, it may be excluded from the definition of commitment: 
(a) 
the ADI receives no fees or commissions to establish or maintain the 
arrangement;12  
(b) 
the borrower is required to apply to the ADI for the initial and each 
subsequent drawdown;  
(c) 
the ADI has full authority, regardless of the fulfilment by the borrower of 
the conditions set out in the facility documentation, over the execution of 
each drawdown;13  
(d) 
the ADI’s decision on the execution of each drawdown is made only after 
assessing the creditworthiness of the borrower immediately prior to 
drawdown. This assessment of creditworthiness must be undertaken by an 
independent party and, at a minimum, include confirmation of the 
borrower’s good credit standing and that no material adverse information 
has arisen subsequent to the limit approval or the most recent credit review 
that would affect the borrower’s creditworthiness;14 and 
(e) 
the borrower is a corporate counterparty that is closely monitored on an 
ongoing basis, and is not an SME retail borrower. 
4. 
In respect of margin lending, the committed amount is the maximum amount that 
the borrower can draw down based on the terms of the loan (such as the notional 
credit limit and the maximum allowable LVR) and the value of the security 
underlying the loan. However, if an ADI does not adjust the credit limit before a 
                                                 
12  
External valuation fees, external legal fees, external advisory fees, and the collection of fees by 
an ADI on behalf of a third-party service provider (e.g. collateral agent) do not vitiate this 
condition.  
13  
The terms of the arrangement must explicitly confer sole discretion on the ADI to control 
drawdown.  
14  
For this purpose, independent party refers to a party independent of the borrower’s relationship 
manager. The independent party should sit within the risk function of the business unit or the 
centralised risk function. Operational or back office teams that perform documentary checks are 
not adequate for this purpose.  
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment C - 28 
drawdown in response to a decline in security value, then the ADI must use the 
original amount in the loan contract that is independent of the security value. 
5. 
Where a commitment exists, an ADI must multiply the committed but undrawn 
amount of the exposure by the relevant CCF in Table 17, and then risk-weight the 
exposure according to the relevant requirements set out in Attachments A, B and 
D to this Prudential Standard.  
Table 17 CCFs  
Transaction type 
CCF (%) 
Direct credit substitutes 
100 
Sale and repurchase agreements and asset sales with recourse15 
100 
Lending of securities or posting of securities as collateral 
100 
Forward asset purchases, forward deposits and partly paid 
shares and securities16 
100 
Other off-balance sheet items that are credit substitutes 
100 
Unsettled securities, commodities and foreign exchange 
transactions accounted for at settlement date 
100 
Other commitments with certain drawdown 
100 
Note issuance and revolving underwriting facilities 
50 
Performance-related contingencies 
50 
Other commitments 
40 
Short-term self-liquidating trade letters of credit arising from 
the movement of goods17 
20 
Intraday limits  
0 
Irrevocable standby commitments under industry support 
arrangements 
0 
 
6. 
Where an ADI has given a commitment to provide an off-balance sheet exposure, 
it may apply the lower of the CCFs applicable to the commitment and the off-
balance sheet exposure.  
                                                 
15  
These items must be weighted according to the type of asset and not according to the type of 
counterparty with whom the transaction has been entered into.  
16  
These items must be weighted according to the type of asset and not according to the type of 
counterparty with whom the transaction has been entered into. 
17  
For the purpose of this item, short-term means a maturity less than 12 months.  
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment D - 29 
Attachment D – Unsettled and failed transactions 
1. 
Delivery-versus-payment (DvP) transactions include any transaction settled 
through a system which provides for the simultaneous exchange of securities or 
commodities for cash, and expose an ADI to the risk of loss on the difference 
between the transaction valued at the agreed settlement price and the transaction 
valued at the current market price. This includes payment-versus-payment 
transactions.  
2. 
An ADI must apply the risk weights in Table 18 to all DvP transactions, excluding 
SFTs, which remain unsettled after their due delivery dates. The amount that must 
be multiplied by the relevant risk weight is the positive current exposure amount 
of the DvP transaction, i.e. the difference between the agreed settlement price of 
the transaction and the current market price of the transaction where this would 
result in a loss to the ADI. 
Table 18 Risk weights for DvP transactions 
Number of business days after settlement date 
Risk weight (%) 
5 to 15 
100 
16 to 30 
625 
31 to 45 
937.5 
46 or more 
1250 
 
3. 
An ADI must hold Regulatory Capital against a non-DvP transaction which 
exposes the ADI to the risk of loss on the full amount of cash paid or deliverables 
delivered, where: 
(a) 
it has paid for debt instruments, equities, foreign currencies or commodities 
before receiving them or it has delivered debt instruments, equities, foreign 
currencies or commodities before receiving payment for them; and 
(b) 
in the case of a cross-border transaction, one day or more has elapsed since 
it made that payment or delivery. 
4. 
An ADI must calculate the capital requirement for a non-DvP transaction as 
follows: 
(a) 
from the business day after the ADI has made its payment or delivery for 
up to and including four business days after the counterparty payment or 
delivery is due, the ADI must treat the transaction as an exposure; and 
(b) 
from five business days after the ADI has made its payment or delivery until 
extinction of the transaction, the ADI must apply a 1250 per cent risk weight 
to the value transferred plus the positive current exposure amount. 
5. 
Where a non-DvP transaction must be treated as an exposure in accordance with 
paragraph 4(a) of this Attachment, an ADI may:  
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment D - 30 
(a) 
apply the relevant risk weight based on the counterparty as detailed in 
Attachment B to this Prudential Standard; or 
(b) 
where exposures are not material, apply a 100 per cent risk weight provided 
that all such exposures are risk-weighted consistently.  
 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment E - 31 
Attachment E – Defaulted exposures 
1. 
Where an exposure is in default, an ADI must apply the risk weights in Table 19 
or Table 20 to the exposure amount, net of any provisions for defaulted exposures 
and partial write-offs.  
2. 
An ADI may recognise eligible credit risk mitigation in calculating the exposure 
amount.  
Risk weights for residential property exposures 
3. 
An ADI must apply the risk weights in Table 19 to its defaulted residential 
property exposures. 
Table 19 Risk weights for defaulted residential property exposures 
 
Risk weight (%) 
Owner-occupied principal-and-interest with LMI 
80 
Owner-occupied principal-and-interest without LMI 
100 
Other standard residential property with LMI 
95 
Other standard residential property without LMI 
120 
Non-standard loans 
150 
 
Risk weights for other defaulted exposures 
4. 
An ADI must apply the risk weights in Table 20 to its defaulted exposures that 
are not residential property exposures.  
Table 20 Risk weights for other defaulted exposures 
 
Risk weight (%) 
Provisions for the defaulted exposure are ≥ 20 per cent of the 
outstanding exposure amount 
100 
Provisions for the defaulted exposure are < 20 per cent of the 
outstanding exposure amount 
150 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment F - 32 
Attachment F – External credit ratings 
1. 
An ADI may only use the solicited ratings of ECAIs to determine the credit rating 
grades that correspond to the risk weights for counterparties and exposures.18 
Ratings must be used consistently for each type of exposure. 
2. 
An ADI must only use an ECAI rating that takes into account and reflects the 
entire amount of credit risk exposure that the ADI has with regard to all amounts 
owed to it.  
3. 
Where an ADI uses the ratings of ECAIs, it must perform due diligence to ensure 
that the external ratings appropriately and conservatively reflect the 
creditworthiness of the counterparty. If the due diligence analysis reflects higher 
risk characteristics than that implied by the exposure’s external rating, an ADI 
must assign a risk weight at least one bucket higher than that determined by the 
external rating. Due diligence analysis must not result in the application of a lower 
risk weight than that determined by the external rating. 
4. 
An ADI must not use credit ratings for one entity within a corporate group to 
determine the risk weight for other entities within the same group. If a rated entity 
has guaranteed another entity’s exposure to the ADI, the guarantee may be 
recognised for risk-weighting purposes if the criteria set out in Attachment I to 
this Prudential Standard are satisfied.  
Issue-specific and issuer ratings 
5. 
Where an ADI has an exposure with an issue-specific rating, the risk weight of 
the exposure must be assigned based on this rating. Where an exposure does not 
have an issue-specific rating, the ADI must apply the following requirements: 
(a) 
where the counterparty has a specific rating for an issued debt, but the 
ADI’s exposure is not an investment in that particular debt, a credit rating 
which maps to a risk weight lower than that which applies to an unrated 
exposure may only be applied if the exposure ranks senior or pari passu in 
all respects to the rated debt issue. If the exposure does not rank senior or 
pari passu with the rated debt issue, then the ADI must treat the exposure 
as unrated and apply the corresponding risk weight; 
(b) 
where the counterparty has an issuer rating, only senior exposures to that 
counterparty may be assigned a risk weight that corresponds to the issuer 
rating. If either the issuer or a single issue has a rating grade that maps to a 
risk weight higher than that applied to unrated exposures, then an exposure 
to that counterparty which ranks pari passu or is subordinated to either the 
senior unsecured issuer rating or the exposure with a low credit rating grade 
                                                 
18  
A solicited rating is a rating that has been initiated and paid for by the issuer or rated counterparty 
or a commercial associate of the issuer or rated counterparty. Sovereign exposures are excluded 
from the requirement to use solicited ratings.  
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment F - 33 
must be assigned the same risk weight as is applicable to the low credit 
rating grade; and 
(c) 
where the counterparty has a specific high-quality rating that only applies 
to a limited class of liabilities, this rating may only be used for exposures 
that fall within that class.  
Multiple assessments 
6. 
Where a counterparty has multiple ECAI general issuer ratings, or where an issue 
has multiple ECAI issue-specific ratings and these ratings correspond to multiple 
credit rating grades, an ADI must apply the following requirements: 
(a) 
where there are two ratings that correspond to different credit rating grades, 
the credit rating grade that corresponds to the higher risk weight must be 
used; or 
(b) 
where there are three or more ratings that correspond to different credit 
rating grades, the credit rating grades corresponding to the two lowest risk 
weights must be referred to and the higher of those two risk weights must 
be used. 
Domestic and foreign currency exposures 
7. 
An ADI must not use an ECAI rating that refers to an exposure denominated in a 
particular currency to derive the credit rating grade for another exposure to the 
same counterparty if that exposure is denominated in another currency. 
Mapping of credit rating grades 
8. 
Where the ECAI is S&P Global Ratings, Moody’s or Fitch Ratings, ratings must 
be mapped in accordance with Table 21 and Table 22. 
Table 21 Recognised long-term ratings and equivalent credit rating grades 
Credit rating 
grade 
S&P Global 
Ratings 
Moody’s 
Fitch Ratings 
1 
AAA 
AA+ 
AA 
AA- 
Aaa 
Aa1 
Aa2 
Aa3 
AAA 
AA+ 
AA 
AA- 
2 
A+ 
A 
A- 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A+ 
A 
A- 
3 
BBB+ 
BBB 
BBB- 
Baa1 
Baa2 
Baa3 
BBB+ 
BBB 
BBB- 
4 
BB+ 
Ba1 
BB+ 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment F - 34 
BB 
BB- 
Ba2 
Ba3 
BB 
BB- 
5 
B+ 
B 
B- 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B+ 
B 
B- 
6 
CCC+ 
CCC 
CCC- 
CC 
C 
D 
Caa1 
Caa2 
Caa3 
Ca 
C 
CCC+ 
CCC 
CCC- 
CC 
C 
D 
 
Table 22 Recognised short-term ratings and equivalent credit rating grades 
Credit rating 
grade 
S&P Global 
Ratings 
Moody’s 
Fitch Ratings 
1 
A-1 
P-1 
F-1 
2 
A-2 
P-2 
F-2 
3 
A-3 
P-3 
F-3 
4 
Others 
Others 
Others 
 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment G - 35 
Attachment G – Collateralised transactions 
1. 
This Attachment specifies how an ADI: 
(a) 
may apply credit risk mitigation to transactions secured by received 
collateral, to reduce its exposure amount for the purpose of calculating its 
Regulatory Capital requirement; and 
(b) 
must determine the EAD for SFTs or, for ADIs that use the simple 
approach, the risk weights. 
2. 
In this Attachment: 
(a) 
“received collateral” refers to eligible financial collateral (as defined in 
paragraphs 14 or 22 of this Attachment) that an ADI receives from the 
counterparty in a transaction, including where the counterparty has lent 
those securities to the ADI, or the transaction is a reverse repurchase 
agreement from the ADI’s perspective; and 
(b) 
“posted collateral” refers to collateral that an ADI posts to the counterparty 
in a transaction, including where the ADI has lent those securities to the 
counterparty, or the transaction is a repurchase agreement from the ADI’s 
perspective.   
3. 
An ADI must select either the simple approach or the comprehensive approach 
and apply that approach consistently to all of its banking book exposures for 
which it has received collateral. An ADI that is approved to use the internal 
ratings-based approach to credit risk is not permitted to use the simple approach. 
4. 
For trading book exposures, an ADI must use the comprehensive approach where 
it has received collateral from the counterparty.  
5. 
Where an ADI acting as an agent in a SFT provides a guarantee that its principal 
will perform its obligations, the risk to the ADI is the same as if the ADI had 
entered into the transaction as the principal. In such circumstances, the ADI must 
calculate a Regulatory Capital requirement as if it were the principal.  
Minimum conditions for collateralised transactions 
6. 
There must be a contract between the ADI and the party lodging received 
collateral which establishes the ADI’s direct, explicit, irrevocable and 
unconditional recourse to the received collateral. In the case of cash collateral, 
this may include a contractual right of set-off on credit balances, but a common 
law right of set-off is insufficient on its own to satisfy this condition. 
7. 
An ADI must take all steps necessary to obtain and maintain an enforceable 
security interest in the received collateral. The legal mechanism by which 
collateral is pledged or transferred must allow the ADI the right to liquidate or 
take legal possession of the received collateral in a timely manner. An ADI must 
have clear and robust procedures for the timely liquidation of collateral to ensure 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment G - 36 
that any legal conditions required for declaring the default of the counterparty and 
liquidating the received collateral are observed.  
8. 
In the event of the counterparty’s default, any requirement on the ADI to serve 
notice on the party lodging the received collateral must not unnecessarily impede 
the ADI’s recourse to the received collateral. 
9. 
Where posted or received collateral is held by a custodian or a third party, the 
ADI must take reasonable steps to ensure that the custodian or third party 
segregates the collateral from other assets.  
10. 
Where the received collateral is lodged with an overseas branch of the ADI, the 
branch holding the collateral must be bound to act in accordance with the 
agreement between the ADI and the party lodging the received collateral. 
11. 
Where the received collateral is lodged by a third party, that third party must 
indemnify or guarantee the performance of the counterparty’s obligations (or 
those of the party on which a claim is held) to the ADI. The ADI must ensure that 
the indemnity or guarantee is legally enforceable (e.g. that it will not fail for lack 
of consideration). 
12. 
An ADI must ensure that sufficient resources are devoted to the orderly operation 
of margin agreements with OTC derivative and securities-financing 
counterparties, as measured by the timeliness and accuracy of its outgoing calls 
and response time to incoming calls. An ADI must have collateral risk 
management policies in place to control, monitor and report: 
(a) 
the risk to which margin agreements expose it, such as the volatility and 
liquidity of the securities exchanged as collateral; 
(b) 
the concentration risk to particular types of collateral; 
(c) 
the re-use of collateral (both cash and non-cash) including the potential 
liquidity shortfalls resulting from the re-use of collateral received from 
counterparties; and 
(d) 
the surrender of rights on collateral posted to counterparties.  
The simple approach 
13. 
For received collateral to be recognised under the simple approach, it must be 
pledged for at least the life of the exposure (i.e. maturity mismatches are not 
permitted) and be marked-to-market and revalued with a minimum frequency of 
six months. The release of received collateral by the ADI must be conditional 
upon the repayment of the exposure. Received collateral may be reduced in 
proportion to the amount of the reduction in the exposure amount.  
Eligible financial collateral under the simple approach 
14. 
An ADI using the simple approach may only recognise the following items as 
eligible financial collateral: 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment G - 37 
(a) 
cash collateral (cash, certificates of deposit and bank bills issued by the 
ADI) on deposit with the ADI;19  
(b) 
gold bullion; 
(c) 
debt securities rated by an ECAI that have a credit rating grade of either: 
(i) 
four (or better) for long-term securities issued by sovereigns;20 or 
(ii) 
three (or better) for short-term or long-term securities issued by other 
counterparties; 
(d) 
debt securities not rated by an ECAI where:  
(i) 
the securities are issued by a bank as senior debt and are listed on a 
recognised exchange;  
(ii) 
all rated issues of the same seniority by the issuing bank have a long-
term or short-term credit rating grade of at least three; and  
(iii) the ADI holding the security has no information suggesting that the 
security justifies a rating below this level;  
(e) 
senior securitisation exposures, as defined in APS 120, with an external 
credit rating grade of one; 
(f) 
units in a listed or unlisted trust where:  
(i) 
the unit price of the trust is publicly quoted on a daily basis; 
(ii) 
the trust is limited to investing in the instruments detailed in 
paragraphs 14(a) to 14(e) of this Attachment;21 and 
(iii) for unlisted trusts, the ADI can redeem its investment within three 
business days.  
15. 
Resecuritisation exposures, as defined in APS 120, are not eligible financial 
collateral. 
Risk weights under the simple approach 
16. 
Under the simple approach, the portion of an exposure that is secured by received 
collateral may be risk-weighted according to the risk weight of the received 
                                                 
19  
Cash-funded credit-linked notes issued by the ADI against exposures in the banking book that 
fulfil the criteria for credit derivatives detailed in Attachment J to this Prudential Standard, may 
be treated as cash collateralised transactions.  
20  
When debt securities that do not have an issue-specific rating are issued by a rated sovereign, 
ADIs may treat the sovereign issuer rating as the rating of the debt security.  
21  
The use of derivative instruments by a trust to hedge investments listed in paragraphs 14(a) to 
14(e) of this Attachment would not prevent units in the trust from being recognised as eligible 
collateral. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment G - 38 
collateral. The risk weight on that portion is subject to a floor of 20 per cent, 
except under the conditions specified in paragraphs 18 to 20 of this Attachment. 
The unsecured portion of an exposure must be risk-weighted according to the risk 
weight applicable to the original counterparty. 
17. 
Where cash on deposit, certificates of deposit and bank bills issued by the ADI 
are held as received collateral at a third-party bank in a non-custodial 
arrangement, and are pledged or assigned to the ADI and the pledge or assignment 
is unconditional and irrevocable, the exposure amount covered by the received 
collateral may be assigned the risk weight of the third-party bank, determined in 
accordance with Attachment B to this Prudential Standard. 
18. 
A zero per cent risk weight may be applied to collateralised transactions where 
the exposure and the collateral are denominated in the same currency and either: 
(a) 
the collateral is cash on deposit as defined in paragraph 14(a) of this 
Attachment; or 
(b) 
the collateral is in the form of sovereign securities eligible for a zero per 
cent risk weight as detailed in Attachment B to this Prudential Standard, 
and its market value has been discounted by 20 per cent. 
19. 
SFTs that fulfil all of the following conditions may be risk-weighted at 10 per 
cent, or at zero per cent where the counterparty is a core market participant as 
defined in paragraph 20: 
(a) 
both the exposure and the collateral are cash, or a sovereign security 
qualifying for a zero per cent risk weight as set out in Attachment B to this 
Prudential Standard; 
(b) 
both the exposure and the collateral are denominated in the same currency; 
(c) 
either the transaction is overnight, or both the exposure and the collateral 
are marked-to-market daily and are subject to daily remargining; 
(d) 
following a counterparty’s failure to remargin, the time between the last 
mark-to-market before the failure to remargin and the liquidation of the 
collateral is no more than four business days;  
(e) 
the transaction is settled across an established settlement system for that 
type of transaction; 
(f) 
the documentation for the transaction is standard market documentation; 
(g) 
the documentation for the transaction specifies that if the counterparty fails 
to satisfy an obligation to deliver cash, securities or a margin call, or 
otherwise defaults, the transaction is immediately terminable; and 
(h) 
upon any default event, regardless of whether the counterparty is insolvent 
or bankrupt, the ADI has an unequivocal, legally enforceable right to 
immediately seize and liquidate the collateral. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment G - 39 
20. 
The following entities are core market participants: 
(a) 
the Australian Government and the Reserve Bank of Australia; 
(b) 
sovereigns that qualify for a zero per cent risk weight in accordance with 
Attachment B to this Prudential Standard; 
(c) 
banks; 
(d) 
other financial institutions (including insurance companies) eligible for a 
20 per cent risk weight as set out in Attachment B to this Prudential 
Standard; and 
(e) 
qualifying central counterparties, as defined in APS 180. 
The comprehensive approach 
21. 
An ADI using the comprehensive approach may take into account the risk 
mitigating effects of any eligible collateral, in calculating the EAD for each 
counterparty.  
Eligible financial collateral under the comprehensive approach 
22. 
Under the comprehensive approach, eligible financial collateral is limited to: 
(a) 
collateral items listed in paragraph 14 of this Attachment; 
(b) 
equities (including convertible bonds) that are included in a main index or 
listed on a recognised exchange; and 
(c) 
units in trusts that meet the conditions of paragraph 14(f) of this Attachment 
and that invest in the items detailed in paragraphs 22(a) or 22(b) of this 
Attachment. 
Calculation of Regulatory Capital for collateralised transactions 
23. 
For a collateralised transaction under the comprehensive approach, including 
SFTs, an ADI must adjust EAD as follows: 
𝐸𝐸∗= 𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚൝0, ൥𝐸𝐸′ −෍𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖× (1 −𝐻𝐻𝑖𝑖𝐴𝐴−𝐻𝐻𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓,𝑖𝑖𝐴𝐴)
𝑖𝑖
൩ൡ 
where: 
E* 
is the adjusted EAD 
E’ 
is ∑𝐸𝐸𝑗𝑗× ൫1 + 𝐻𝐻𝑗𝑗𝐴𝐴൯
𝑗𝑗
 where Ej is the EAD of the j-th item of exposure 
or posted collateral under the transaction, prior to haircuts or 
adjustment for received collateral. For OTC derivatives to which the 
ADI applies the adjusted CEM (refer to Attachment E to APS 180), 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment G - 40 
E’ is the credit equivalent amount of the OTC derivative without 
adjustment for the impact of collateral 
Hj 
is the haircut appropriate to the j-th item of exposure or posted 
collateral under the transaction, calculated in accordance with 
paragraph 28 of this Attachment 
Ci 
is the current value of the i-th item of received collateral under the 
transaction, adjusted for any maturity mismatch in accordance with 
paragraphs 24 to 27 of this Attachment 
Hi 
is the haircut appropriate to the i-th item of received collateral under 
the transaction, calculated in accordance with paragraph 28 of this 
Attachment 
Hfx,i is the haircut appropriate for currency mismatch between the 
exposure and the i-th item of received collateral under the transaction, 
calculated in accordance with paragraph 29 of this Attachment 
A 
is the margining frequency adjustment factor determined in 
accordance with paragraph 32 of this Attachment. 
Collateral maturity mismatch 
24. 
A maturity mismatch exists where the residual maturity of the term of lodgement 
of the collateral is less than the maturity of the exposure covered by the collateral. 
25. 
Where there is a maturity mismatch, the collateral may only be recognised where 
the original maturity of the term of lodgement of the collateral is greater than or 
equal to 12 months and the residual maturity is greater than or equal to 3 months. 
26. 
For the purpose of determining maturity: 
(a) 
the effective maturity of the underlying exposure must be calculated using 
the longest possible remaining time before the counterparty is scheduled to 
fulfil its obligation; and 
(b) 
for the collateral, an ADI must take into account any clause or incentive 
within the documentation supporting the transaction that may reduce its 
term of lodgement so that the shortest possible effective maturity is used.  
27. 
Where there is a maturity mismatch, an ADI must apply the following adjustment: 
𝐶𝐶= 𝑃𝑃× 𝑡𝑡−0.25
𝑇𝑇−0.25 
where: 
C 
=  
value of the collateral adjusted for maturity mismatch 
P 
=  
collateral amount  
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment G - 41 
t 
= 
min (T, residual maturity of the term of lodgement of the 
collateral) expressed in years 
T 
=  
min (5, residual maturity of the exposure) expressed in years. 
Supervisory haircuts 
28. 
An ADI must use the supervisory haircuts set out in Table 23 to determine the 
haircuts for the collateral (Hi) and the exposure (Hj). 
Table 23 Supervisory haircuts 
Credit rating 
grade for debt 
securities 
Residual 
maturity 
Sovereign 
(%) 
Other 
issuer22 (%) 
Securitisation 
exposure23 
(%) 
1 (long- and short-
term) 
≤ 1 year 
0.5 
1 
2 
> 1 year, ≤ 3 
years 
2 
3 
8 
> 3 years, 
≤ 5 years 
4 
> 5 years, 
≤ 10 years 
4 
6 
16 
> 10 years 
12 
2-3 (long- and 
short-term) and 
unrated bank 
securities24 
≤ 1 year 
1 
2 
Not eligible 
> 1 year, ≤ 3 
years 
3 
4 
> 3 years, 
≤ 5 years 
6 
> 5 years, 
≤ 10 years 
6 
12 
> 10 years 
20 
4 (long-term) 
All 
15 
Not eligible 
Main index equities (including 
convertible bonds) and gold 
20 
Other equities and convertible 
bonds listed on a recognised 
exchange 
30 
                                                 
22  
This includes banks, domestic PSEs and corporates. 
23  
Securitisation exposure has the meaning given in APS 120.  
24  
Unrated bank securities must meet the requirements set out in paragraph 14(d) of this Attachment. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment G - 42 
Securities that are posted 
collateral but not eligible financial 
collateral 
30 
Units in trusts 
Highest haircut applicable to any security in 
which the trust can invest 
Cash25 
0 
Securities forming part of posted 
or received collateral for 
transactions that satisfy the criteria 
in paragraphs 19 and 20 of this 
Attachment, provided that, if the 
transaction is in a netting set, all 
transactions in that netting set 
satisfy those criteria26  
0 
 
29. 
An ADI must apply a haircut of 8 per cent for currency risk (Hfx,i) where the 
exposure and collateral are denominated in different currencies, and zero per cent 
where they are denominated in the same currency.  
Adjustments for different holding periods and non-daily mark-to-market or 
remargining 
30. 
An ADI must apply the minimum holding periods and conditions in Table 24 to 
SFTs, other capital-market-driven transactions (e.g. OTC derivative transactions 
and margin lending) and secured lending. 
Table 24 Minimum holding periods and conditions 
Transaction type 
Minimum holding 
period (business days) 
Condition 
SFTs 
5 
Daily remargining 
Other capital market transactions  
10 
Daily remargining 
Secured lending 
20 
Daily revaluation 
31. 
Under the following circumstances, an ADI must apply a higher minimum 
holding period: 
(a) 
for all netting sets where the number of trades exceeds 5,000 at any point 
during a quarter, an ADI must set the minimum holding period to 
20 business days for the following quarter; 
                                                 
25  
For received collateral, only amounts that satisfy the eligible cash collateral requirements set out 
in paragraph 14(a) of this Attachment may be recognised as cash for this purpose.  
26  
For the avoidance of doubt, if a netting set includes any transaction that does not meet the criteria 
in paragraphs 19 and 20 of this Attachment, no transactions in the netting set are eligible for the 
zero per cent haircut. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment G - 43 
(b) 
for netting sets containing one or more trades involving either illiquid 
collateral, or an OTC derivative that cannot be easily replaced, an ADI must 
set the minimum holding period to 20 business days. An ADI must 
determine both liquidity and ease of replacement in the context of stressed 
market conditions; and 
(c) 
if an ADI has experienced more than two margin call disputes on a 
particular netting set over the previous two quarters that have lasted longer 
than the applicable minimum holding period (before consideration of this 
provision), the ADI must use a minimum holding period that is at least 
double the supervisory floor for that netting set for the subsequent two 
quarters. 
In determining the holding period, an ADI must consider whether trades or 
securities it holds as collateral are concentrated in a particular counterparty and 
whether, if that counterparty exited the market precipitously, the ADI would be 
able to replace its trades. 
32. 
An ADI must calculate the margining frequency adjustment factor for a 
transaction or netting set as:  
𝐴𝐴= ඨ𝑁𝑁𝑅𝑅+ (𝑇𝑇𝑀𝑀−1)
10
 
where: 
TM  is the minimum holding period for the type of transaction determined 
in accordance with paragraphs 30 to 31 of this Attachment 
NR  is the number of business days between remarginings or revaluations. 
Treatment of SFTs covered by master netting agreements 
33. 
For SFTs covered by an eligible bilateral netting agreement that meets the 
requirements detailed in Attachment H to this Prudential Standard, an ADI that 
uses the comprehensive approach must calculate the EAD as: 
𝐸𝐸∗= 𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚ቐ0, ෍𝐸𝐸𝑖𝑖−
𝑖𝑖
෍𝐶𝐶𝑗𝑗+ 0.4 × 𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒+ 0.6 × 𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒
√𝑁𝑁
+ ෍(𝐸𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓×
𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓
𝑖𝑖
𝐻𝐻𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓)ቑ 
where: 
E*  is the adjusted EAD of the netting set 
Ei  
is the current value of all cash lent and non-cash posted collateral 
Cj  
is the current value of all cash borrowed and non-cash received 
collateral  
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment G - 44 
𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒= อ෍𝐸𝐸𝑠𝑠𝐻𝐻𝑠𝑠
𝑆𝑆
อ 
𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒= ෍𝐸𝐸𝑠𝑠|𝐻𝐻𝑠𝑠|
𝑆𝑆
 
Es  
is the net current value of each security issuance under the netting 
set (always a positive value) 
Hs  
is the haircut appropriate to Es, as set out in Table 23 and scaled by 
the margining frequency adjustment factor in paragraph 32 of this 
Attachment. Hs has a positive (negative) sign if the security is 
posted (received) collateral  
N  
is the number of security issues contained in the netting set (except 
that issuances where the value of Es is less than one tenth of the value 
of the largest Es in the netting set are not included in the count) 
Efx  
is the absolute value of the net position in each currency fx different 
from the settlement currency 
Hfx  is the haircut appropriate for currency mismatch of currency fx. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment H - 45 
Attachment H – Netting 
1. 
An ADI may reduce its exposure amount, for the purpose of calculating its 
Regulatory Capital requirement, through the application of close-out netting or 
netting by novation, in accordance with the requirements set out in this 
Attachment. 
2. 
An ADI that chooses to net transactions must do so on a consistent basis, and 
must apply netting to all transactions in both the banking book and trading book 
that are covered by a netting agreement. 
3. 
An ADI that applies netting for Regulatory Capital purposes must have a netting 
policy that, at a minimum, addresses the requirements in this Prudential Standard. 
The netting policy must apply to all transactions subject to netting and include 
systems and controls for: 
(a) 
monitoring and reporting netted transactions on a gross and net basis; and 
(b) 
monitoring and managing roll-off risk and termination risk. 
4. 
An ADI must maintain adequate records to support the application of the netting 
agreement. 
Use of netting 
5. 
For Regulatory Capital purposes, an ADI may only net the following types of 
transactions: 
(a) 
on-balance sheet loans and deposits; 
(b) 
SFTs; and 
(c) 
OTC derivative transactions (across both the banking and trading books) 
with a single counterparty. This may include netting across different types 
of derivatives, but not across derivatives and SFTs. 
6. 
An ADI may only net internal transactions between the banking book and trading 
book if: 
(a) 
the netted transactions are marked-to-market daily, where applicable;  and 
(b) 
any collateralised instruments used in the transactions comply with the 
criteria for eligible collateral in the banking book as detailed in 
Attachment G to this Prudential Standard. 
                                                 
27
27  
The holding period for the haircuts depends, as for other SFTs, on the frequency of margining.  
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment H - 46 
On-balance sheet netting 
7. 
An ADI may only use the net exposures of loans and deposits as the basis for its 
RWA calculation where it: 
(a) 
has a well-founded basis for concluding that the netting or offsetting 
agreement is legally enforceable in each relevant jurisdiction regardless of 
whether the counterparty is insolvent or bankrupt; 
(b) 
is able at any time to determine those loans and deposits with the same 
counterparty that are subject to the netting agreement, and the deposits meet 
the criteria for eligible financial collateral; 
(c) 
monitors and controls its roll-off risks; and 
(d) 
monitors and controls the exposures on a net basis. 
8. 
Where all of the conditions in paragraph 7 of this Attachment are satisfied, an 
ADI may net loans and deposits to calculate RWA by applying the relevant 
requirements under either the simple or comprehensive approach as set out in 
Attachment G to this Prudential Standard. For this purpose, loans must be treated 
as exposures and deposits must be treated as eligible financial collateral. 
Eligible bilateral netting agreement 
9. 
An eligible bilateral netting agreement, which includes a master netting 
agreement, is a netting agreement with a counterparty which: 
(a) 
provides the non-defaulting party the right to terminate and close out, in a 
timely manner, all transactions under the netting agreement upon an event 
of default, including in the event of insolvency or bankruptcy of the 
counterparty;28  
(b) 
provides for the netting of gains and losses on transactions (including the 
value of any collateral) terminated and closed out under it, so that only a 
single net amount is owed by one party to the other;29 
(c) 
allows for the prompt liquidation or set-off of collateral upon the event of 
default;  
(d) 
is legally enforceable in each relevant jurisdiction regardless of whether the 
counterparty is insolvent or bankrupt; and  
                                                 
28  
In some countries, there are provisions for the authorities to appoint an administrator to a troubled 
bank. Under statutory provisions applying in those countries, the appointment of an administrator 
may not constitute grounds for the triggering of netting agreements. Such provisions do not 
prevent the recognition of affected netting agreements for the purposes of this Prudential 
Standard, provided that a netting agreement can still take effect in the event the bank under 
administration does not meet its obligations under transactions as they fall due.  
29  
For forwards, swaps, options and similar derivative contracts, this will include the net sum of the 
positive and negative mark-to-market values of individual transactions.  
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment H - 47 
(e) 
does not include a walkaway clause (i.e. any clause which, in the event of 
default of a counterparty, permits a non-defaulting counterparty to make 
limited payments only, or no payments at all, to a defaulting party, even if 
the defaulting party is a net creditor). 
Legal enforceability 
10. 
To ensure the legal enforceability of a netting agreement, an ADI must: 
(a) 
obtain a written and reasoned legal opinion that concludes that in the event 
of default, liquidation, bankruptcy or other similar circumstances of a party 
to the netting agreement, the relevant courts and authorities would find the 
ADI’s exposure is limited to the single net sum determined in the netting 
agreement under: 
(i) 
the law of the jurisdiction in which the counterparty is incorporated, 
formed or resides (in the case of a natural person), and if a foreign 
branch of the counterparty is involved, the law of the jurisdiction in 
which the branch is located; 
(ii) 
the law that governs the individual transactions involved; and 
(iii) the law that governs any contract or agreement necessary to give 
effect to the netting; and 
(b) 
have policies and procedures in place to ensure that the legal enforceability 
of netting agreements is kept under review in response to possible changes 
in relevant laws. 
11. 
An ADI must not recognise a netting agreement for Regulatory Capital purposes 
if there is any doubt as to its legal enforceability. Where an ADI becomes aware 
that a regulator or supervisor of a counterparty has given notice that it is not 
satisfied that netting is enforceable under the laws of the regulator’s or 
supervisor’s home country, it must not recognise the netting agreement for 
Regulatory Capital purposes regardless of any legal opinion obtained by the ADI. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment I - 48 
Attachment I – Guarantees 
1. 
Where an ADI’s exposure to a counterparty is covered by a guarantee from an 
eligible guarantor, an ADI may substitute the risk weight of the counterparty for 
the risk weight of the guarantor for the covered portion of the exposure.30 The 
uncovered portion of the exposure must be risk-weighted according to the risk 
weight applicable to the original counterparty. 
Minimum requirements 
2. 
To be recognised as eligible CRM, a guarantee must: 
(a) 
represent a direct claim on an eligible guarantor; 
(b) 
be an explicitly documented obligation assumed by the guarantor;  
(c) 
be explicitly referenced to specific exposures or a pool of exposures, so that 
the extent of the cover is clearly defined and incontrovertible; 
(d) 
be irrevocable, except in the case of non-payment by a protection purchaser 
of money due in respect of the credit protection contract. The guarantee 
must not contain any clauses that would allow the guarantor to unilaterally 
cancel the cover of the guarantee, or that would increase the effective cost 
of cover as a result of deteriorating credit quality in the guaranteed 
exposure;31  
(e) 
be unconditional. The guarantee must not include any clauses that are 
outside the direct control of the ADI, or that could prevent the guarantor 
from being obliged to pay out in a timely manner in the event that the 
underlying counterparty fails to make the payment(s) due; 
(f) 
on the default or non-payment of the counterparty, allow the ADI to pursue, 
in a timely manner, the guarantor for any monies outstanding under the 
documentation governing the transaction. The ADI must have the right to 
receive payment from the guarantor without first having to take legal action 
in order to pursue the counterparty for payment; and 
(g) 
cover all types of payments the underlying borrower is expected to make 
under the documentation governing the transaction. Where a guarantee 
covers payment of principal only, interest and other amounts not covered 
by the guarantee must be treated as uncovered. 
                                                 
30  
Guarantees that provide partial coverage whereby the ADI and guarantor share losses on a pro 
rata basis are eligible for the same recognition. 
31  
While the requirement for irrevocability does not require that the guarantee and the exposure be 
maturity matched, the guarantor must not have the ability to change the agreed maturity ex post. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment I - 49 
Eligible guarantors 
3. 
An ADI must only recognise guarantees provided by the following entities when 
they have a lower risk weight than the counterparty: 
(a) 
sovereigns;  
(b) 
banks;  
(c) 
other entities that are externally rated, where credit protection is provided 
to a non-securitisation exposure. This includes guarantees provided by 
parent, subsidiary and affiliate companies where they have a lower risk 
weight than the borrower; and  
(d) 
where credit protection is provided to a securitisation exposure, other 
entities with a credit rating grade of three or better and that were externally 
rated two or better at the time the credit protection was provided. This also 
includes guarantees provided by parent, subsidiary and affiliated companies 
where they have a lower risk weight than the borrower. 
4. 
A claim that is indirectly guaranteed by the Australian Government (i.e. the 
Commonwealth’s guarantee of the entity that provides the guarantee) may be 
treated as guaranteed by the Australian Government provided that: 
(a) 
the indirect guarantee covers all credit risk elements of the claim; 
(b) 
both the original guarantee and the indirect guarantee meet all the 
requirements detailed in paragraph 2 of this Attachment, except that the 
indirect guarantee need not be direct and explicit to the original claim; and 
(c) 
the ADI is satisfied that the cover of the indirect guarantee is robust and 
there is no historical evidence to suggest that the coverage of the indirect 
guarantee is not equivalent to that of a direct guarantee of the Australian 
Government. 
5. 
Letters of comfort do not qualify as eligible guarantees for CRM purposes. 
Materiality thresholds 
6. 
Where a guarantee provides for a materiality threshold on payments below which 
no payment will be made in the event of loss, it is equivalent to a retained first 
loss position and must be deducted from Common Equity Tier 1 Capital in 
accordance with APS 111. This deduction will be capped at the amount of capital 
the ADI would be required to hold against the full value of the underlying 
exposure. 
Proportional and tranched cover 
7. 
Where there is partial coverage of an exposure by a guarantee and the covered 
and uncovered portions are of equal seniority (i.e. the ADI and the guarantor share 
losses on a pro rata basis), capital relief will be afforded on a proportional basis. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment I - 50 
This means that the covered portion of the exposure will receive the treatment 
applicable to eligible guarantees with the remainder treated as uncovered. 
8. 
Where there is partial coverage of an exposure by a guarantee and there is a 
difference in seniority between the covered and uncovered portions of the 
exposure, then the arrangement is considered to be a synthetic securitisation and 
is subject to the requirements set out in APS 120. 
Currency mismatch 
9. 
A currency mismatch exists where a guarantee is denominated in a different 
currency from that in which the exposure is denominated. In this case, the amount 
of the exposure deemed to be protected (Ga) must be reduced by the application 
of a haircut (Hfx) as follows: 
𝐺𝐺𝑎𝑎= 𝐺𝐺× (1 −𝐻𝐻𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓) 
where: 
G  
= nominal amount of the guarantee 
Hfx  = haircut appropriate for the currency mismatch between the 
guarantee and the underlying exposure. 
10. 
Where there is a currency mismatch, an ADI must apply a haircut of 8 per cent 
(based on a 10 business day holding period and daily marking-to-market). The 
haircut must be adjusted depending on the actual frequency of revaluation of the 
currency mismatch, in accordance with paragraph 32 of Attachment G to this 
Prudential Standard. 
Maturity mismatch 
11. 
A maturity mismatch exists where the residual maturity of a guarantee is less than 
the maturity of the exposure covered by the guarantee. 
12. 
Where there is a maturity mismatch, a guarantee may only be recognised as 
eligible CRM where the original maturity of the guarantee is greater than or equal 
to 12 months and the residual maturity is greater than or equal to 3 months.  
13. 
Where credit protection provided by a single guarantor to the same underlying 
exposure has different maturities, an ADI must divide the exposure into separate 
covered portions for risk-weighting purposes. 
14. 
For the purposes of determining maturity: 
(a) 
the effective maturity of the underlying exposure must be calculated using 
the longest possible remaining time before the counterparty is scheduled to 
fulfil its obligation; and 
(b) 
for the guarantee, an ADI must take into account any clause or incentive 
within the documentation supporting the transaction that may reduce its 
maturity so that the shortest possible effective maturity is used.  
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment I - 51 
15. 
Where there is a maturity mismatch, an ADI must apply the following adjustment: 
𝑃𝑃𝑎𝑎= 𝑃𝑃× 𝑡𝑡−0.25
𝑇𝑇−0.25 
where: 
Pa 
= 
value of the guarantee adjusted for maturity mismatch 
P 
= 
guarantee amount adjusted for any haircuts (in which case,  
          P = Ga as determined in paragraph 9 of this Attachment) 
t 
= 
min (T, residual maturity of the guarantee) expressed in years 
T 
= 
min (5, residual maturity of the exposure) expressed in years. 
 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment J - 52 
Attachment J – Credit derivatives 
Purchased credit protection 
1. 
Where an ADI purchases credit protection through an eligible credit derivative, it 
may substitute the risk weight of the counterparty with the risk weight of the 
credit protection seller for the covered portion of the exposure.32 The uncovered 
portion of the exposure must be risk-weighted according to the risk weight 
applicable to the original counterparty. 
2. 
For the purposes of CRM, eligible credit derivatives are limited to: 
(a) 
single-name credit-default swaps; and  
(b) 
certain total-rate-of-return swaps. 
Where an ADI purchases credit protection through a total-rate-of-return swap and 
records the net payments received on the swap as net income, but does not record 
offsetting deterioration in the value of the asset that is protected (either through 
reductions in fair value or by an addition to reserves), the credit protection must 
not be recognised. 
3. 
Cash-funded credit linked notes issued by an ADI against exposures in the 
banking book that satisfy the minimum requirements for credit derivatives as 
detailed in this Attachment (with the exception of eligible credit protection 
providers set out in paragraph 12 of this Attachment) may be treated as cash-
collateralised transactions under Attachment G to this Prudential Standard.  
4. 
Where an ADI buys credit protection through a credit derivative that forms part 
of a synthetic securitisation, the requirements detailed in APS 120 apply. 
Minimum requirements 
5. 
To be recognised as eligible CRM, a credit derivative must: 
(a) 
represent a direct claim on the protection seller; 
(b) 
be explicitly referenced to specific exposures or a pool of exposures, so that 
the extent of the cover is clearly defined and incontrovertible; 
(c) 
be irrevocable, except in the case of non-payment by a protection purchaser 
of money due in respect of the credit protection contract. The credit 
derivative contract must not include any clause that would allow the 
protection seller to unilaterally cancel the protection of the credit derivative, 
                                                 
32  
Credit derivatives that provide partial coverage whereby the ADI and the credit protection seller 
share losses on a pro rata basis are eligible for the same recognition. 
 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment J - 53 
or that would increase the effective cost of cover as a result of deteriorating 
credit quality in the hedged exposure;33  
(d) 
be unconditional. The credit derivative contract must not include any 
clauses that are outside the direct control of the ADI, and the credit events 
specified in the contract must not prevent the protection seller from being 
obliged to pay out in a timely manner in the event that the borrower of the 
underlying exposure fails to make the due payment(s); 
(e) 
at a minimum, specify the following as credit events under the terms of the 
credit derivative contract: 
(i) 
the failure to pay an amount due under the terms of the underlying 
exposure that is in effect at the time of such failure;  
(ii) 
the bankruptcy, insolvency or inability of the borrower of the 
underlying exposure to pay its debts, or its failure or admission in 
writing of its inability generally to pay its debts as those debts become 
due, or analogous events; and 
(iii) subject to paragraph 9 of this Attachment, the restructuring of the 
underlying exposure, including any forgiveness or postponement of 
principal, interest or fees that results in a credit loss event (i.e. write-
off, provision for a defaulted exposure or other similar debit to the 
profit and loss account of the ADI); 
(f) 
not terminate prior to the expiration of any grace period required for a 
default on the underlying obligation to occur as a result of a failure to pay; 
and 
(g) 
clearly identify those parties responsible for determining whether a credit 
event has occurred. This determination must not be the sole right of the 
protection seller. An ADI buying the credit protection must have the right 
and ability to inform the protection seller of the occurrence of a credit event. 
6. 
Where the credit derivative is based on cash settlement, the ADI must have a 
robust valuation process in order to reliably estimate losses on the reference 
obligation specified in the credit derivative contract, including a defined period 
for obtaining post credit event valuations of the reference obligation. 
7. 
Where an ADI purchases credit protection and an existing credit exposure of the 
ADI is the deliverable obligation under the credit derivative contract, the terms 
of the underlying exposure must allow for its transfer to the protection seller. If 
the protection purchaser's right and ability to transfer the underlying obligation to 
the protection provider is required for settlement, the terms of the underlying 
                                                 
33  
While the requirement for irrevocability does not require that the credit derivative and the 
exposure be maturity matched, the credit protection provider must not have the ability to change 
the agreed maturity ex post. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment J - 54 
obligation must provide that any required consent to such transfer may not be 
unreasonably withheld. 
8. 
An exception to paragraph 7 of this Attachment applies where there is a restriction 
on the transfer of the existing credit exposure and this restriction only applies in 
the event of restructuring. In this case, the limit described in paragraph 9 of this 
Attachment applies as if restructuring of the underlying exposure was not 
included within the terms of the credit derivatives contract. 
9. 
If restructuring of the underlying exposure is not included within the terms of the 
credit derivative contract but all other requirements of paragraphs 5 to 7 of this 
Attachment are met, an ADI may recognise 60 per cent of the lesser of the amount 
of the credit protection purchased and the amount of the underlying exposure.  
10. 
Where there is a mismatch between the underlying obligation and the reference 
obligation under the credit derivative, including the obligation used for the 
purposes of determining the cash settlement value or the deliverable obligation, 
an ADI may only recognise the credit derivative as eligible CRM if the following 
conditions are satisfied: 
(a) 
the reference obligation ranks pari passu with, or is junior to the underlying 
obligation; and 
(b) 
the underlying obligation and reference obligation share the same obligor 
(i.e. the same legal entity) and legally enforceable cross-default or cross-
acceleration clauses are in place. 
11. 
Where there is a mismatch between the underlying obligation and the obligation 
used for the purposes of determining whether a credit event has occurred, an ADI 
may only recognise the credit derivative as eligible CRM if the following 
conditions are satisfied: 
(a) 
the obligation used to determine whether a credit event has occurred ranks 
pari passu with, or is junior to, the underlying obligation; and 
(b) 
the underlying obligation and reference obligation share the same obligor 
(i.e. the same legal entity) and legally enforceable cross-default or cross-
acceleration clauses are in place.  
Eligible credit protection providers 
12. 
An ADI must only recognise credit protection provided by the following entities: 
(a) 
sovereigns;  
(b) 
banks;  
(c) 
other entities that are externally rated, where credit protection is provided 
to a non-securitisation exposure. This includes credit protection provided 
by parent, subsidiary and affiliate companies where they have a lower risk 
weight than the borrower; and  
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment J - 55 
(d) 
where credit protection is provided to a securitisation exposure, other 
entities with a credit rating grade of three or better and that were externally 
rated two or better at the time the credit protection was provided. This also 
includes credit protection provided by parent, subsidiary and affiliated 
companies where they have a lower risk weight than the borrower. 
Materiality thresholds 
13. 
Where a credit derivative provides for a materiality threshold on payments below 
which no payment will be made in the event of loss, it is equivalent to a retained 
first loss position and must be deducted from Common Equity Tier 1 Capital in 
accordance with APS 111. This deduction will be capped at the amount of capital 
the ADI would be required to hold against the full value of the underlying 
exposure. 
Proportional and tranched cover 
14. 
Where there is partial coverage of an underlying exposure by a credit derivative 
and the protected and unprotected portions are of equal seniority (i.e. the ADI 
buying credit protection and the protection seller share losses on a pro rata basis), 
capital relief will be afforded on a proportional basis. This means that the 
protected portion of the underlying exposure will receive the capital treatment 
applicable to eligible credit derivatives with the remainder treated as unprotected. 
15. 
Where there is partial coverage of an underlying exposure by a credit derivative 
and there is a difference in seniority between the protected and unprotected 
portions of the underlying exposure, then the arrangement is considered to be a 
synthetic securitisation and is subject to the requirements set out in APS 120. 
Currency mismatch 
16. 
A currency mismatch exists where an ADI has purchased credit protection using 
a credit derivative and the credit derivative is denominated in a different currency 
from that in which the underlying exposure is denominated. In this case the 
amount of the exposure deemed to be protected (Ga) must be reduced by the 
application of a haircut (Hfx) as follows: 
Ga = G ×(1−H fx ) 
where: 
G  
= 
nominal amount of the credit derivative 
Hfx  = 
haircut appropriate for the currency mismatch between the 
credit derivative and the underlying exposure. 
17. 
Where there is a currency mismatch, an ADI must apply a haircut of 8 per cent 
(based on a 10 business day holding period and daily marking-to-market). The 
haircut must be adjusted depending on the actual frequency of revaluation of the 
currency mismatch, in accordance with paragraph 32 of Attachment G to this 
Prudential Standard.  
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment J - 56 
Maturity mismatch 
18. 
A maturity mismatch exists where the residual maturity of a credit derivative is 
less than the maturity of the underlying exposure. 
19. 
Where there is a maturity mismatch, a credit derivative may only be recognised 
as eligible CRM where the original maturity of the credit derivative is greater than 
or equal to 12 months and the residual maturity is greater than or equal to 3 
months.  
20. 
Where credit protection provided by a single protection seller to the same 
underlying exposure has different maturities, an ADI must divide the exposure 
into separate covered portions for risk-weighting purposes. 
21. 
For the purpose of determining maturity:  
(a) 
the effective maturity of the underlying exposure must be calculated using 
the longest possible remaining time before the counterparty is scheduled to 
fulfil its obligation; and 
(b) 
for the credit derivative, an ADI that purchases credit protection must take 
into account any clause or incentive within the credit derivative contract 
that may reduce its maturity so that the shortest possible effective maturity 
is used.  
22. 
Where there is a maturity mismatch, an ADI must apply the following adjustment: 
𝑃𝑃𝑎𝑎= 𝑃𝑃× 𝑡𝑡−0.25
𝑇𝑇−0.25 
where: 
Pa 
= 
value of the amount of credit protection adjusted for maturity 
mismatch 
P 
= 
the amount of credit protection adjusted for any haircuts (in 
which case, P = Ga as determined in paragraph 16 of this 
Attachment) 
t 
= 
min (T, residual maturity of the credit derivative) expressed in 
years 
T 
= 
min (5, residual maturity of the underlying exposure) 
expressed in years. 
Sold credit protection 
23. 
An ADI that sells credit protection that is not detailed in paragraphs 29 and 30 of 
this Attachment must, prior to execution of the relevant credit derivative contract, 
undertake a written assessment of the appropriate Regulatory Capital treatment 
for the transaction. The ADI must notify APRA prior to execution and provide its 
written assessment to APRA upon request. The ADI must apply the treatment set 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment J - 57 
out in its written assessment unless APRA determines an alternative methodology 
for calculating the Regulatory Capital treatment. 
24. 
Where an ADI uses total-rate-of-return swaps to hedge a banking book credit 
exposure in accordance with the requirements set out in this Attachment, those 
transactions must be included in the ADI’s banking book. All other total-rate-of-
return swaps must be included in an ADI’s trading book.  
25. 
Any instruments that would give rise to a net short credit or equity position in the 
banking book must be included in an ADI's trading book.34  
26. 
An ADI that has sold credit protection using a credit derivative must, for capital 
adequacy purposes, assume that 100 per cent of the credit risk is purchased 
irrespective of the range of specified credit events. 
27. 
An ADI that sells credit protection using a credit derivative containing an 
embedded option to extend the term of the credit derivative must assume the 
longest possible effective maturity of the credit derivative. This is regardless of 
any contractual arrangements that may give either the protection buyer or the 
protection seller the incentive to reduce the contract term. 
28. 
When determining the amount of credit protection sold, an ADI must assume that 
any materiality thresholds included in the credit derivative contract do not reduce 
the acquired credit risk. 
Credit-default swaps 
29. 
Where credit protection is sold via a credit-default swap referenced to a single 
reference entity, the ADI acquires an exposure to the credit risk of that entity. The 
risk weight that must be applied to the exposure is the risk weight that would 
otherwise apply to the reference entity. The amount of the exposure is the 
maximum possible amount payable under the terms of the credit derivative 
contract if a credit event were to occur. 
First- and second-to-default basket credit derivatives 
30. 
An ADI which sells credit protection through a first-to-default or second-to-
default credit derivative, must apply the following capital requirements to these 
exposures:  
(a) 
for first-to-default credit derivatives, the risk weights of the assets included 
in the basket must be aggregated up to a maximum of 1250 per cent and 
multiplied by the nominal amount of the protection provided by the credit 
derivative to obtain the risk-weighted asset amount; and 
(b) 
for second-to-default credit derivatives, the treatment is similar; however, 
in aggregating the risk weights, the asset with the lowest risk-weighted 
                                                 
34  
An ADI will have a net short risk position for equity risk or credit risk in the banking book if the 
present value of the banking book increases when an equity price decreases or when a credit 
spread on an issuer or group of issuers of debt increases.  
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 112 – Attachment J - 58 
amount can be excluded from the calculation. This treatment applies 
respectively for nth-to-default credit derivatives, for which the n-assets with 
the lowest risk-weighted amounts can be excluded from the calculation.  


--- End of file: APS 112 Capital Adequacy Standardised Approach.txt ---

FINAL 
January 2023 
APS 113 
- 1
Prudential Standard APS 113 
Capital Adequacy: Internal Ratings-based 
Approach to Credit Risk 
Objectives and key requirements of this Prudential 
This Prudential Standard sets out the requirements that an authorised deposit-taking 
Standard 
institution that has, or is seeking, approval to use an internal ratings-based approach 
to credit risk must meet, both at the time of initial implementation and on an 
ongoing basis. 
The key requirements of this Prudential Standard are that an authorised deposit-
taking institution must: 
•
•
•
determine the capital requirement for a given credit exposure, within certain 
parameters set by APRA;
develop and maintain rating and risk estimation systems and processes that 
provide for a meaningful assessment of borrower and transaction
 
characteristics, meaningful differentiation of risk, and accurate and consistent 
quantitative estimates of risk; and
ensure that systems and processes for the internal ratings-based approach to 
determining capital also play an integral role in the institution’s credit 
approval, risk management and internal capital allocation functions.
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 - 2 
Table of Contents 
Authority ........................................................................................................... 3 
Application and commencement ...................................................................... 3 
Interpretation .................................................................................................... 3 
Adjustments and exclusions ............................................................................ 3 
Previous exercise of discretion ........................................................................ 4 
Scope ............................................................................................................... 4 
Definitions ........................................................................................................ 5 
Key principles ................................................................................................... 7 
Governance and oversight ............................................................................... 8 
Asset classes ................................................................................................. 10 
IRB approval .................................................................................................. 13 
Attachment A - IRB risk-weight functions ....................................................... 17 
Attachment B - Risk components for each asset class .................................. 22 
Attachment C - Treatment of expected losses and provisions ....................... 33 
Attachment D - Minimum requirements for the use of an IRB approach ........ 35 
Attachment E - Requirements for recognition of collateral and credit risk 
mitigation ....................................................................................................... 51 
Attachment F - Risk-weighted assets for purchased receivables ................... 58 
Attachment G - Supervisory slotting criteria ................................................... 62 
 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 - 3 
Authority 
1. 
This Prudential Standard is made under section 11AF of the Banking Act 1959 
(Banking Act).  
Application and commencement 
2. 
This Prudential Standard applies to authorised deposit-taking institutions (ADIs) 
that are seeking, or have been approved, to use an internal ratings-based (IRB) 
approach to credit risk for the purpose of determining the Regulatory Capital 
requirement for credit risk.  
3. 
A reference to an ADI in this Prudential Standard, unless otherwise indicated, is 
a reference to: 
(a) 
an ADI on a Level 1 basis; and  
(b) 
a group of which an ADI is a member on a Level 2 basis.  
4. 
If an ADI to which this Prudential Standard applies is: 
(a) 
the holding company for a group, the ADI must ensure that the requirements 
in this Prudential Standard are met on a Level 2 basis, where applicable; or  
(b) 
a subsidiary of an authorised non-operating holding company 
(authorised NOHC), the authorised NOHC must ensure that the 
requirements in this Prudential Standard are met on a Level 2 basis, where 
applicable. 
5. 
This Prudential Standard commences on 1 January 2023. 
Interpretation 
6. 
Terms that are defined in Prudential Standard APS 001 Definitions appear in bold 
the first time they are used in this Prudential Standard. 
7. 
Where this Prudential Standard provides for APRA to exercise a power or 
discretion, the power or discretion is to be exercised in writing. 
8. 
In this Prudential Standard, unless the contrary intention appears, a reference to 
an Act, Regulations or Prudential Standard, is a reference to the Act, Regulations 
or Prudential Standard as in force from time to time. 
Adjustments and exclusions 
9. 
APRA may adjust or exclude a specific prudential requirement in this Prudential 
Standard in relation to one or more specified ADIs or authorised NOHCs.  
1
                                                 
1  
Refer to subsection 11AF(2) of the Banking Act. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 - 4 
Previous exercise of discretion 
10. 
An ADI must contact APRA if it seeks to place reliance, for the purposes of 
complying with this Prudential Standard, on a previous exemption or other 
exercise of discretion by APRA under a previous version of this Prudential 
Standard. 
Scope 
11. 
The following items are excluded from the scope of this Prudential Standard: 
(a) 
non-standard retail residential mortgage exposures,2 equity exposures, 
margin lending exposures, cash items, fixed assets, unsettled and failed 
transactions, and related-party exposures that are subject to the 
requirements of Prudential Standard APS 112 Capital Adequacy: 
Standardised Approach to Credit Risk (APS 112);  
(b) 
assets or investments that are required to be deducted from Common 
Equity Tier 1 Capital, Tier 1 Capital or Total Capital under Prudential 
Standard APS 111 Capital Adequacy: Measurement of Capital (APS 111); 
(c) 
securitisation exposures that are subject to the requirements of Prudential 
Standard APS 120 Securitisation (APS 120), excluding funding-only or 
synthetic securitisations for which an ADI must include the underlying 
exposures in the pool in its calculation of the Regulatory Capital 
requirement for credit risk under this Prudential Standard; 
(d) 
liabilities of a covered bond special purpose vehicle to an issuing ADI as 
specified in Prudential Standard APS 121 Covered Bonds (APS 121); and  
(e) 
items that are subject to capital requirements under Prudential Standard 
APS 116 Capital Adequacy: Market Risk (APS 116) which do not have a 
counterparty credit risk exposure under Prudential Standard APS 180 
Capital Adequacy: Counterparty Credit Risk (APS 180). 
12. 
Subject to paragraph 13 of this Prudential Standard, an ADI must apply the 
requirements set out in this Prudential Standard to calculate risk-weighted assets 
(RWA) and expected loss (EL) for any exposures of overseas banking 
subsidiaries that form part of the Level 2 group.  
13. 
For the purpose of calculating the Level 2 Regulatory Capital requirement for 
exposures of an overseas banking subsidiary that is prudentially regulated by a 
prescribed New Zealand authority, an ADI must calculate RWA and EL using the 
prescribed New Zealand authority’s equivalent prudential rules as in force from 
time to time except that, in calculating RWA, the ADI must not apply the 
prescribed New Zealand authority’s:3 
                                                 
2  
For this purpose, a non-standard retail residential mortgage exposure refers to an exposure in the 
retail residential mortgage sub-asset class (as defined in this Prudential Standard) that is classified 
as a non-standard loan according to APS 112. 
3  
Prescribed New Zealand authority has the meaning given in subsection 5(1) of the Banking Act. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 - 5 
(a) 
scaling factor that is equivalent to paragraph 2 of Attachment A to this 
Prudential Standard, and instead must only apply a scaling factor of 1.1; 
and  
(b) 
floor value and calculation that is equivalent to paragraph 4 of Attachment 
A to Prudential Standard APS 110 Capital Adequacy (APS 110), and 
instead must only apply the floor value and calculation in APS 110.  
Definitions 
14. 
The following definitions are used in this Prudential Standard: 
(a) 
capital requirement (K) – means the capital requirement for unexpected loss 
derived from inputting the risk components to the risk-weight functions; 
(b) 
commitment – has the meaning given in APS 112; 
(c) 
commodities finance – has the meaning given in APS 112;  
(d) 
corporate exposure – has the meaning given in paragraph 30 of this 
Prudential Standard; 
(e) 
credit conversion factor (CCF) – means the percentage value used to 
convert an off-balance sheet exposure into an on-balance sheet equivalent; 
(f) 
credit obligation – means a contractual agreement in which a borrower 
receives something of value now (usually cash) with the agreement to repay 
the ADI at some stated date; 
(g) 
credit risk mitigation (CRM) – means a credit risk mitigation technique that 
meets the requirements detailed in Attachment E to this Prudential Standard 
and APS 112 where applicable;  
(h) 
defaulted exposure – means a non-performing exposure as defined in 
Prudential Standard APS 220 Credit Risk Management (APS 220);  
(i) 
dilution risk – means the possibility that the total amount of purchased 
receivables is reduced through cash or non-cash credits to the receivables’ 
obligors; 
(j) 
effective maturity (M) – means the remaining effective term of a credit 
obligation; 
(k) 
expected loss (EL) – means the average credit loss that the ADI is 
reasonably expected to experience; 
(l) 
exposure at default (EAD) – means the gross exposure under a facility (i.e. 
the amount that is legally owed to the ADI) upon the default of a borrower; 
(m) financial institution – has the meaning given in paragraph 34 of this 
Prudential Standard; 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 - 6 
(n) 
group of connected borrowers – means a group of connected counterparties 
that is connected by control or single-risk relationships under Prudential 
Standard APS 221 Large Exposures (APS 221). Where an ADI assesses 
that a borrower may form part of more than one group of connected 
borrowers, the ADI may primarily assign the borrower based on a control 
relationship rather than a single-risk relationship for the purpose of this 
Prudential Standard;  
(o) 
income-producing real estate (IPRE) – has the meaning given in paragraph 
31 of this Prudential Standard;  
(p) 
large corporate – means a corporate counterparty with total consolidated 
annual revenue greater than $750 million as reported in the audited financial 
statements of the corporate counterparty or, where the counterparty is part 
of a group, the audited financial statements of the group. The revenue 
amount must be based on the average amount calculated over the prior three 
years, or on the latest amount updated at least every three years by the ADI;  
(q) 
lenders’ mortgage insurance (LMI) – has the meaning given in APS 112; 
(r) 
loss given default (LGD) – means the ADI’s economic loss upon the default 
of a borrower; 
(s) 
object finance – has the meaning given in APS 112; 
(t) 
probability of default (PD) – means the risk of borrower default; 
(u) 
project finance – has the meaning given in APS 112; 
(v) 
purchased receivables – means a pool of receivables that has been 
purchased by the ADI from another entity; 
(w) rating system – means all of the methods, processes, controls, data 
collection and technology that support the assessment of credit risk, the 
assignment of internal credit risk ratings and the quantification of 
associated default, exposure and loss estimates; 
(x) 
regulated financial institution – means a financial institution that is subject 
to prudential requirements that are broadly equivalent to APRA’s prudential 
requirement, or is part of a group where any material legal entity within the 
group is subject to prudential requirements that are broadly equivalent to 
those set by APRA; 
(y) 
revolving exposure – means an exposure where a borrower’s outstanding 
balance is permitted to fluctuate based on their decision to borrow and 
repay, up to a limit established by the ADI. This does not include exposures 
that allow prepayments and subsequent redraws of those prepayments; 
(z) 
risk component – means the ADI’s internal estimate, or a supervisory 
estimate provided in this Prudential Standard, of probability of default, loss 
given default, exposure at default or effective maturity required as inputs to 
the risk-weight functions; 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 - 7 
(aa) risk-weight function – means the calculation method that transforms the 
risk components into the capital requirement for unexpected loss; 
(bb) securities financing transaction (SFT) – has the meaning given in APS 112; 
(cc) sovereign – has the meaning given in APS 112; 
(dd) specialised lending – has the meaning given in APS 112 but also includes 
IPRE as defined in this Prudential Standard; 
(ee) unexpected loss (UL) – means the credit loss in excess of expected loss; 
and 
(ff) unregulated financial institution – means a financial institution that is not a 
regulated financial institution. 
Key principles 
15. 
An ADI that has received IRB approval from APRA may rely on its internal 
estimates for some, or all, of the risk components required as inputs to the risk-
weight functions used in determining the Regulatory Capital requirement for 
credit exposures. The risk components include measures of PD, LGD, EAD and 
M. 
16. 
An ADI must meet the relevant minimum requirements detailed in this Prudential 
Standard to use an IRB approach for a given asset class. 
17. 
An ADI must apply a foundation IRB (FIRB), advanced IRB (AIRB), retail IRB 
or supervisory slotting approach to a given asset class in accordance with its IRB 
approval and subject to the constraints set out in paragraph 18 of this Prudential 
Standard. Where the ADI uses the: 
(a) 
FIRB approach, it must provide its own estimates of PD and M, and rely on 
supervisory estimates for LGD and EAD; 
(b) 
AIRB approach, it must provide its own estimates of PD, LGD (excluding 
senior unsecured and subordinated corporate exposures for which the ADI 
must use supervisory LGD estimates) and M, and rely on supervisory 
estimates for EAD; 
(c) 
retail IRB approach, it must provide its own estimates of PD, LGD and 
EAD (excluding non-revolving retail exposures for which the ADI must use 
supervisory EAD estimates); and 
(d) 
supervisory slotting approach, it must provide its own mapping of credit 
exposures to the supervisory slotting categories, and rely on supervisory 
risk weights for the slotting categories and supervisory estimates for EAD. 
Under all approaches, the ADI must use the relevant IRB risk-weight function or 
schedule, as detailed in Attachment A to this Prudential Standard, to derive RWA 
for UL and the approach detailed in Attachment C to this Prudential Standard to 
derive EL. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 - 8 
18. 
An ADI must apply the: 
(a) 
FIRB approach to all sovereign, financial institution and large corporate 
exposures, except IPRE exposures that meet the definition of a large 
corporate exposure where the ADI may apply a FIRB or supervisory 
slotting approach in accordance with its IRB approval; 
(b) 
retail IRB approach to all retail exposures; and 
(c) 
supervisory slotting approach to all project finance, object finance and 
commodities finance exposures.  
19. 
An ADI may reduce its Regulatory Capital requirement through the use of CRM 
where it meets the requirements detailed in Attachments B, E and F to this 
Prudential Standard, and APS 112 where applicable. 
Governance and oversight 
20. 
All material aspects of an ADI’s rating and estimation processes must be 
approved by the ADI’s Board, or relevant Board committee, and senior 
management. Those parties must possess a general understanding of the ADI’s 
rating systems and a detailed understanding of the associated management 
reports. Senior management must notify the Board, or Board committee, of 
material changes or exceptions from established policies that could have a 
material impact on the ADI’s rating systems. 
21. 
Senior management must understand the design and operation of an ADI’s rating 
systems and approve any material differences identified between established 
procedures and actual practice. Senior management must ensure that the rating 
systems are operating as intended on an ongoing basis. Senior management and 
staff in the credit risk control function must meet regularly to discuss the 
performance of the rating process, areas requiring improvement and the status of 
efforts to improve previously identified deficiencies. 
22. 
Internal ratings must be an essential part of the reporting to the Board and senior 
management. Reporting must include: 
(a) 
risk profile by grade; 
(b) 
migration across borrower grades; 
(c) 
quantitative estimates of the relevant parameters for each borrower grade 
and, where relevant, facility grade; and 
(d) 
comparison of realised default rates (and, where relevant, realised LGD and 
EAD rates) against expectations. 
Reporting frequencies may vary with the significance and type of information and 
the level of the recipients. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 - 9 
23. 
An ADI must have documented policies that detail sound rating system 
development, validation, implementation, governance and control processes. 
These policies must: 
(a) 
be approved and actively discussed by the ADI’s Board or a delegated 
committee; 
(b) 
define the roles and responsibilities of parties involved in rating system 
development, validation, approval and implementation; 
(c) 
be actively enforced by senior management; 
(d) 
outline the processes for the development, validation, approval, 
implementation and governance of all rating and estimation processes. This 
must include the formation of: 
(i) 
a register that documents the specification, application, risk 
classification (materiality) and owner of each rating system; 
(ii) 
a change log covering all rating system changes; and 
(iii) a centralised issues register that records issues relating to each rating 
system; and 
(e) 
outline an ongoing monitoring and validation cycle for each rating system. 
Credit risk control 
24. 
An ADI must have an independent credit risk control unit that is responsible for 
the design or selection, implementation and performance of the ADI’s rating 
systems. The unit must be functionally independent of the personnel and 
management functions responsible for originating exposures. Areas of 
responsibility must include: 
(a) 
testing and monitoring internal borrower and facility grades, and pools; 
(b) 
production and analysis of summary reports from the ADI’s rating systems, 
including historical default data sorted by the rating at the time of default 
and one year prior to default, migration analysis and monitoring of trends 
in key rating criteria; 
(c) 
implementing procedures to verify that rating definitions are consistently 
applied across business units and geographic areas; 
(d) 
reviewing and documenting any changes to the rating process, including the 
reasons for those changes; and 
(e) 
reviewing the rating criteria to evaluate if they remain predictive of risk. 
25. 
The credit risk control unit must actively participate in the development, 
selection, implementation and validation of rating models. It must assume 
oversight and supervision responsibilities for any models used in the rating 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 - 10 
process and have ultimate responsibility for the ongoing review of, and alterations 
to, the ADI’s rating models. 
26. 
In order to ensure proper accountability, an ADI’s policies must clearly define 
and document the responsibilities of, and performance standards for, personnel 
within the credit risk control unit. Personnel must have the appropriate incentives 
to meet their performance standards and the knowledge, skills, tools and 
resources necessary to carry out their responsibilities. 
Independent review 
27. 
An ADI’s rating systems and operations must be reviewed at least annually by 
internal audit or an equally independent function. The review must assess whether 
the ADI’s development, implementation, validation, governance and control 
processes are effective and operating as designed. The areas of review must 
include: 
(a) 
the operations of the credit risk control function; 
(b) 
the estimation of PD and, where relevant, LGD and EAD; and 
(c) 
the ADI’s adherence to all applicable minimum requirements detailed in 
this Prudential Standard. 
The findings of this review must be documented. 
Asset classes 
28. 
For the purpose of deriving the Regulatory Capital requirement under an IRB 
approach, an ADI must assign its banking book exposures to one of the following 
IRB asset classes:  
(a) 
corporate (which includes the four sub-asset classes of specialised lending); 
(b) 
sovereign;  
(c) 
financial institution; and 
(d) 
retail (which consists of four separate sub-asset classes). 
29. 
An ADI must ensure that its methodology for assigning credit exposures to 
different IRB asset classes complies with its IRB approval and is consistent over 
time.  
Definition of corporate exposures 
30. 
The corporate IRB asset class includes all credit exposures to corporate 
counterparties and public sector entities, including exposures within the four 
specialised lending sub-asset classes of project finance, object finance, 
commodities finance and IPRE. A corporate exposure means a credit obligation 
of a corporation, partnership,  proprietorship or public sector entity, or any other 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 - 11 
credit exposure that does not meet the criteria of any other defined IRB asset 
class. 
Income-producing real estate 
31. 
IPRE means a method of providing funding for real estate where the prospects 
for repayment of the exposure depend primarily on the cash flows generated by 
the asset or other real estate assets owned by the borrower.  
32. 
In order to treat an exposure as a general corporate exposure rather than IPRE, an 
ADI must have recourse to a borrower that meets all of the following criteria: 
(a) 
the borrower is a corporate entity that is managed by a recognised, 
professional and reputable management team; 
(b) 
the ADI’s exposure to the borrower is not specifically or substantially 
financing limited recourse development projects; 
(c) 
the borrower has greater than $250 million in tangible assets, to which the 
ADI has unconditional recourse; 
(d) 
real estate assets are sufficiently diversified such that: 
(i) 
no single asset represents greater than 25 per cent of the borrower’s 
real estate portfolio by value; and 
(ii) 
real estate assets are not concentrated in one particular specific 
geographic location; and 
(e) 
for real estate operators or investors, tenants are sufficiently diversified 
such that no single tenant represents: 
(i) 
greater than 25 per cent of portfolio net rental income for portfolios 
of retail shopping centres that typically require significant anchor 
tenants to attract speciality tenants; and 
(ii) 
greater than 10 per cent of portfolio net rental income for all other 
portfolios of real estate assets (e.g. commercial offices, industrial 
buildings, hotels), with the exception of Government tenants. 
Definition of sovereign exposures 
33. 
The sovereign IRB asset class includes all credit exposures to sovereign 
counterparties as defined in APS 112. 
Definition of financial institution exposures 
34. 
The financial institution IRB asset class includes all credit exposures to financial 
institution counterparties. A financial institution means a legal entity whose main 
business includes: the management of financial assets, lending, factoring, leasing, 
provision of credit enhancements, securitisation, investments, financial custody, 
central counterparty services, proprietary trading. APRA may also determine 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 - 12 
other activities to be financial in nature. Financial institutions include, but are not 
limited to, banks, securities firms, insurance companies and leveraged funds. 
Definition of retail exposures 
35. 
The retail IRB asset class includes any exposure that:  
(a) 
is extended to an individual (that is, a natural person) or individuals; and 
(b) 
forms part of a large pool of exposures that is managed by the ADI on a 
pooled basis. 
Small-business exposures or exposures secured by residential real estate, whether 
or not extended to an individual, may be classified as retail exposures where they 
satisfy the criteria in paragraphs 37 or 40 of this Prudential Standard, respectively. 
36. 
An ADI must assign its retail exposures to either the retail residential mortgage, 
qualifying revolving retail (QRR), small- and medium-sized enterprise (SME) 
retail or other retail sub-asset classes. 
Retail residential mortgage 
37. 
The retail residential mortgage IRB sub-asset class includes exposures that are: 
(a) 
partly or fully secured by residential real estate;  
(b) 
managed in a similar manner to other retail exposures; and  
(c) 
not for business purposes.  
Qualifying revolving retail 
38. 
The QRR IRB sub-asset class includes exposures that satisfy the following 
criteria: 
(a) 
the exposures are revolving, unsecured and unconditionally cancellable 
(both contractually and in practice) by the ADI. Exposures may be 
considered unconditionally cancellable if the terms of the contract permit 
the ADI to cancel at any time any existing credit lines or limits provided to 
a borrower at the ADI’s discretion, and demand immediate repayment for 
any outstanding balance to the full extent allowable under consumer 
protection and related legislation;   
(b) 
the exposures are to individuals and not for business purposes; 
(c) 
the maximum exposure of an individual account in the sub-portfolio is 
$100,000; and 
(d) 
the exposures exhibit, in comparison with other types of retail lending 
products, low loss rate volatility relative to the average level of loss rates 
(especially within low PD bands).  
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 - 13 
39. 
QRR exposures must be further split into exposures to transactors and revolvers. 
For this purpose:  
(a) 
a QRR transactor is a borrower that has repaid the balance of their facility 
in full at each scheduled repayment date for the previous 12 months; and 
(b) 
a QRR revolver is a borrower that does not meet the criteria for treatment 
as a QRR transactor. An ADI must treat any QRR exposure with less than 
12 months of repayment history as an exposure to a QRR revolver. 
Small- and medium-sized enterprise retail 
40. 
The SME retail IRB sub-asset class includes exposures that meet the following 
criteria:  
(a) 
the total business-related exposure of the ADI to a small-business borrower 
or group of connected borrowers is less than $1.5 million.  Small-business 
exposures extended to, or guaranteed by, an individual are subject to the 
same exposure threshold. For a subsidiary of the ADI operating in a 
jurisdiction that applies a different threshold for SME retail, as set by the 
overseas prudential regulator, the ADI may apply that jurisdiction’s 
threshold for the calculation of its Level 2 Regulatory Capital requirement 
for the relevant exposures; 
(b) 
the reported consolidated annual revenue of a small-business borrower or 
group of connected borrowers is less than $75 million;  
(c) 
both the borrower and exposure are non-complex; and 
(d) 
the ADI treats small-business exposures in its internal risk management 
systems in the same manner as other retail exposures consistently over time. 
This requires that such exposures:  
(i) 
are originated in a similar manner to other retail exposures; and  
(ii) 
must not be managed individually in a way that is comparable to an 
exposure in the corporate IRB asset class but rather as part of a 
portfolio segment or pool of exposures with similar risk 
characteristics for the purposes of risk assessment and quantification. 
This does not preclude these exposures from being managed 
individually at some stages of the risk management process. 
Other retail 
41. 
The other retail IRB sub-asset class includes all other retail exposures.  
IRB approval 
42. 
APRA may approve an ADI to use an IRB approach for Regulatory Capital 
purposes. APRA may impose conditions on the ADI’s use of an IRB approach 
for Regulatory Capital purposes.  
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 - 14 
43. 
An ADI must obtain prior approval from APRA to use an IRB approach for 
Regulatory Capital purposes. Where APRA approves the use of an IRB approach, 
it will specify how the IRB approach applies in relation to the ADI. 
Initial approval 
44. 
In its initial application to use an IRB approach, an ADI must seek IRB approval 
for all material asset classes and business units of the ADI. The ADI must 
demonstrate that it complies with the minimum requirements of this Prudential 
Standard for the relevant IRB asset classes or sub-asset classes, and has been 
using rating systems and risk components that are broadly in line with the 
requirements of this Prudential Standard for at least three years prior to an IRB 
approval being given.  
45. 
In its initial application to use an IRB approach, an ADI must, unless determined 
otherwise by APRA, also seek approval to use an internal risk measurement 
model for the purpose of determining the Regulatory Capital requirement for 
interest rate risk in the banking book as set out in Prudential Standard APS 117 
Capital Adequacy: Interest Rate Risk in the Banking Book. 
46. 
In addition to credit exposures for which an ADI must use the standardised 
approach to credit risk, APRA may permit the ADI to use a combination of an 
IRB approach and the standardised approach for Regulatory Capital purposes. 
This approach is referred to as ‘partial use’. Partial use may apply on a temporary 
or permanent basis.  
47. 
An ADI seeking approval to adopt partial use must provide APRA with 
information on any business activities for which the ADI proposes to use the 
standardised approach to credit risk. This information must be provided both at 
the time of the ADI’s initial application for the use of an IRB approach and 
subsequent to the ADI obtaining IRB approval. 
4 
Phased roll-out 
48. 
Where it is not practical for an ADI to implement an IRB approach across all 
material asset classes and business units at the same time, APRA may approve a 
phased roll-out of an IRB approach by the ADI. A phased roll-out is where the 
ADI, in accordance with a specified timetable: 
(a) 
adopts an IRB approach across asset classes within a particular business 
unit; 
(b) 
adopts an IRB approach across business units in the Level 2 group; 
(c) 
moves from the FIRB approach to the AIRB approach, where the use of the 
AIRB approach is permitted; and 
                                                 
4  
Improvements to an ADI’s rating systems or risk components will not render it non-compliant 
with this three-year requirement. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
(d) 
moves from the supervisory slotting approach to the FIRB or AIRB 
approach for IPRE. 
However, where the ADI adopts an IRB approach for an asset class or sub-asset 
class within a particular business unit, it must apply that IRB approach to all 
exposures in that asset class or sub-asset class within that business unit. 
49. 
An ADI that has received approval to adopt a phased roll-out of an IRB approach 
must have an implementation plan in place that specifies the extent and timing of 
roll-out of the IRB approach across all significant asset classes or sub-asset 
classes and business units.  
50. 
During the roll-out period:  
(a) 
a significant portion (at APRA’s discretion) of any expected Regulatory 
Capital benefit from initial IRB approval may only become available after 
obtaining final approval. APRA may vary this percentage during the period 
from initial to final approval to reflect APRA’s assessment of the ADI’s 
ability to progress to final approval; and 
(b) 
no capital relief will be granted for intra-group transactions that reduce an 
ADI’s aggregate capital requirement by transferring credit risk among 
entities on the standardised approach to credit risk, FIRB approach and 
AIRB approach. This includes, but is not limited to, asset sales and cross-
guarantees. 
APS 113 
 - 15 
Permanent partial use 
51. 
APRA will approve permanent partial use of an IRB approach only in exceptional 
circumstances. An ADI seeking such approval must be able to demonstrate that 
the relevant business activities to which an IRB approach does not apply are 
immaterial in terms of size and perceived risk profile. 
Ongoing requirements 
52. 
An ADI that has obtained IRB approval must seek prior approval from APRA 
where it intends to make: 
(a) 
changes to its rating systems that will result in a material change in RWA 
for a given type of exposure; or   
(b) 
a significant change to its modelling assumptions.  
53. 
An ADI that has obtained IRB approval must continue to employ that IRB 
approach on an ongoing basis except to the extent that the IRB approval is 
revoked or suspended for some or all of the ADI’s operations. A return to the 
standardised approach to credit risk, or the use of the FIRB approach where the 
ADI has approval to use the AIRB approach, will generally only be permitted in 
exceptional circumstances. 
54. 
APRA may, at any time, vary or revoke an IRB approval, or impose additional 
conditions on the IRB approval if it considers that:  
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 - 16 
(a) 
an ADI is not complying with this Prudential Standard; or 
(b) 
it is appropriate, having regard to the particular circumstances of the ADI. 
Where APRA has varied or revoked an IRB approval, it may require the ADI to 
apply the standardised approach to credit risk for some or all of its operations, 
until it meets the conditions specified by APRA for returning to an IRB approach. 
55. 
APRA may require an ADI to reduce its level of credit risk or increase its capital 
if APRA considers that the ADI’s capital for credit risk under an IRB approach 
is not commensurate with its credit risk profile. 
56. 
If an ADI becomes aware that it is not complying with a requirement of this 
Prudential Standard, it must notify APRA and provide a plan for its timely return 
to compliance.  
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment A - 17 
Attachment A - IRB risk-weight functions 
1. 
An ADI must apply the risk-weight functions and schedules set out in this 
Attachment to calculate RWA for UL for corporate, sovereign, financial 
institution and retail exposures. In calculating RWA: 
(a) 
PD and LGD are expressed as percentages;  
(b) 
EAD is expressed in Australian dollars; 
(c) 
ln denotes the natural logarithm; 
(d) 
N(x) denotes the cumulative distribution function for a standard normal 
random variable (i.e. the probability that a normal random variable with 
mean zero and variance of one is less than or equal to x); and 
(e) 
G(z) denotes the inverse cumulative distribution function for a standard 
normal random variable (i.e. the value of x such that N(x) = z). 
2. 
To determine total RWA under an IRB approach, the ADI must sum: 
(a) 
RWA for UL for all IRB asset classes, aside from those exposures excluded 
in (b) and (c) below, and multiply the amount by a scaling factor of 1.1; 
(b) 
RWA for UL for exposures under the supervisory slotting approach; and 
(c) 
RWA for UL for aggregate residual value of lease exposures which are risk 
weighted according to Table 2 of this Attachment. 
Risk-weighted assets for corporate, sovereign and financial 
institution exposures 
3. 
Except where the supervisory slotting approach applies to specialised lending 
exposures, an ADI must calculate RWA for corporate, sovereign and financial 
institution exposures using assigned estimates of PD, LGD, EAD and M for a 
given exposure. These estimates must be calculated in accordance with 
Attachments B and D to this Prudential Standard.  
4. 
For non-defaulted corporate, sovereign and financial institution exposures, the 
calculation of RWA for UL is: 
1−𝑒𝑒−50×𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃
−50×𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃
Correlation (R) = 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴× ቀ0.12 × ቀ
−50 ቁ+ 0.24 × ቂ1 −ቀ
1−𝑒𝑒
ቁቃቁ 
1−𝑒𝑒
1−𝑒𝑒−50
Maturity adjustment (b) = [0.11852 −0.05478 × ln(𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃)]2 
Capital requirement (K) = 
𝐿𝐿(𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃) + √𝑅𝑅× 𝐿𝐿(0.999)
1 + (𝐴𝐴−2.5) × 𝑏𝑏
ቈ𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝑃𝑃× 𝑁𝑁ቆ
ቇ−𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃× 𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝑃𝑃቉× ൬
൰ 
√1 −𝑅𝑅
1 −1.5 × 𝑏𝑏
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment A - 18 
RWA = K × 12.5 × EAD 
If the K calculation results in a negative capital requirement, an ADI must apply 
a zero capital requirement for that exposure. 
5. 
An ADI must set the asset value correlation multiplier (AVCM) equal to 1. 
However, where the exposure is to a financial institution and either of the below 
conditions are met, the ADI must set AVCM equal to 1.25: 
(a) 
where the exposure is to a regulated financial institution that has total assets 
of greater than or equal to $125 billion. For the purpose of determining total 
assets, an ADI must use the amounts as reported in the most recent audited 
financial statements of the financial institution, or where the financial 
institution forms part of a group, the audited financial statements of the 
group; or 
(b) 
where the exposure is to an unregulated financial institution regardless of 
size. 
Firm-size adjustment for small- and medium-sized enterprises  
6. 
Where corporate counterparties form part of a group of connected borrowers that 
has reported consolidated annual revenue of less than $75 million, an ADI may 
apply an adjustment to the corporate risk-weight function by substituting the 
following correlation formula for that in paragraph 4 of this Attachment: 
Correlation (R) = 
1 −𝑒𝑒−50×𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃
1 −𝑒𝑒−50×𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃
0.12 × ቆ1 −𝑒𝑒−50 ቇ+ 0.24 × ቈ1 −ቆ1 −𝑒𝑒−50 ቇ቉
𝑆𝑆−7.5
−0.04 × ൬1 −
൰ 
67.5
where: 
S is expressed as total consolidated annual revenue between $7.5 million and $75 
million. For borrowers with revenue of less than $7.5 million, S has a minimum 
value of $7.5 million. 
7. 
Where revenue data is unavailable, an ADI must apply the following minimum 
values: 
(a) 
$45 million where EAD is less than $5 million; and 
(b) 
$75 million where EAD is greater than or equal to $5 million.  
Risk-weighted asset adjustment for income-producing real estate  
8. 
For non-defaulted IPRE exposures subject to the FIRB or AIRB approach, the 
calculation of RWA for UL is: 
RWA = K × 12.5 × EAD × 1.5 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment A - 19 
Risk-weighted assets for specialised lending exposures 
subject to the supervisory slotting approach 
9. 
For non-defaulted specialised lending exposures subject to the supervisory 
slotting approach, an ADI must map its internal rating grades for those exposures 
to the slotting categories of strong, good, satisfactory and weak by applying the 
criteria detailed in Attachment G to this Prudential Standard.  
10. 
To calculate RWA in respect of UL for non-defaulted specialised lending 
exposures subject to the supervisory slotting approach, an ADI must multiply 
EAD, calculated in accordance with Attachment B to this Prudential Standard, by 
the relevant risk weight in Table 1. 
Table 1 
Risk weights for UL under the supervisory slotting approach 
Supervisory category 
Strong 
Good 
Satisfactory 
Weak 
Risk weight 
70% 
90% 
115% 
250% 
 
Risk-weighted assets for retail exposures 
11. 
An ADI must calculate RWA for retail exposures using assigned estimates of PD, 
LGD and EAD for a given exposure, calculated in accordance with Attachments 
B and D to this Prudential Standard.  
Retail residential mortgage exposures 
12. 
For non-defaulted retail residential mortgage exposures,  the risk-weight function 
is: 
Correlation (R) = 0.15 
Capital requirement (K) =
(
)
 𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝑃𝑃× 𝑁𝑁ቀ
𝐺𝐺𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃+√𝑅𝑅×𝐺𝐺(0.999)ቁ−𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃× 𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝑃𝑃 
√1−𝑅𝑅
This risk-weight function also applies to the unsecured portion of exposures that 
are partly secured by residential real estate. 
13. 
For non-defaulted retail residential mortgage exposures that meet the definition 
of an owner-occupied, principal-and-interest residential mortgage exposure as 
detailed in Attachment A to APS 112, the calculation of RWA for UL is: 
RWA = EAD × Max[K × 12.5 × 1.4, 0.05] 
14. 
For all other non-defaulted retail residential mortgage exposures, the calculation 
of RWA for UL is: 
RWA = EAD × Max[K × 12.5 × 1.7, 0.05] 
Qualifying revolving retail exposures 
15. 
For non-defaulted QRR exposures, the calculation of RWA for UL is: 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment A - 20 
Correlation (R) = 0.04 
Capital requirement (K) = 𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿× 𝑁𝑁ቀ
𝐺𝐺(𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃)+√𝑅𝑅×𝐺𝐺(0.999)
√1−𝑅𝑅
ቁ−𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃× 𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿 
Risk-weighted assets (RWA) = K × 12.5 × EAD 
Small- and medium-sized enterprise retail exposures 
16. 
For non-defaulted SME retail exposures that are fully or partly secured by 
residential real estate, the calculation of RWA for UL is: 
Correlation (R) = 0.15 
Capital requirement (K) =
(
 𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝑃𝑃× 𝑁𝑁ቀ
𝐺𝐺𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃)+√𝑅𝑅×𝐺𝐺(0.999)ቁ−𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃× 𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝑃𝑃 
√1−𝑅𝑅
Risk-weighted assets (RWA) = K × 12.5 × EAD 
This RWA calculation also applies to the unsecured portion of SME retail 
exposures that are partly secured by residential real estate. 
17. 
For all other non-defaulted SME retail exposures, the calculation of RWA for UL 
is: 
Correlation (R) = 0.03 × ቀ
1−𝑒𝑒−35×𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃
−35×𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃
−35 ቁ+ 0.16 × ቂ1 −ቀ
1−𝑒𝑒
ቁቃ 
1−𝑒𝑒
1−𝑒𝑒−35
Capital requirement (K) = 
(
)
𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝑃𝑃× 𝑁𝑁ቀ
𝐺𝐺𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃+√𝑅𝑅×𝐺𝐺(0.999)ቁ−𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃× 𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝑃𝑃 
√1−𝑅𝑅
Risk-weighted assets (RWA) = K × 12.5 × EAD 
Other retail exposures 
18. 
For all other non-defaulted retail exposures, the calculation of RWA for UL is: 
Correlation (R) = 0.03 × ቀ
1−𝑒𝑒−35×𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃
−35×𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃
−35 ቁ+ 0.16 × ቂ1 −ቀ
1−𝑒𝑒
1−𝑒𝑒
1−𝑒𝑒−35 ቁቃ 
Capital requirement (K) = 𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝑃𝑃× 𝑁𝑁ቀ
𝐺𝐺(𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃)+√𝑅𝑅×𝐺𝐺(0.999)ቁ−𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃× 𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝑃𝑃 
√1−𝑅𝑅
Risk-weighted assets (RWA) = K × 12.5 × EAD 
Risk-weighted assets for lease exposures 
19. 
Lease exposures are defined in APS 112. Leases, other than those that expose an 
ADI to residual value risk, may be treated in the same manner as exposures 
secured by the relevant collateral.  The ADI may use its own estimates of LGD 
if it uses the AIRB approach. Where the ADI uses the FIRB approach, the 
5
                                                 
5  
Residual value risk means the risk that an ADI is exposed to potential loss due to the fair value of 
a leased asset declining below its residual estimate at the inception of the lease. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment A - 21 
minimum requirements in relation to eligible collateral must be met as detailed in 
Attachment E to this Prudential Standard. 
20. 
For leases that expose an ADI to residual value risk, the discounted lease payment 
stream must be risk weighted according to the PD and LGD the ADI assigns to 
the lessee, and the aggregate residual value of all lease exposures must be risk 
weighted according to Table 2. 
Table 2 
Risk weights for residual value under lease exposures 
 
Risk weight (%) applying 
to the portion of 
aggregate residual value 
≤ 10% of Tier 1 capital  
Risk weight (%) applying 
to the portion of 
aggregate residual value 
> 10% of Tier 1 capital 
Exposures to residual 
value 
100 
250 
 
Risk-weighted assets for defaulted exposures 
21. 
K in respect of UL for a defaulted exposure under the AIRB or retail IRB 
approach is equal to the greater of zero and the amount by which the LGD 
estimate for that exposure exceeds an ADI’s best estimate of EL given current 
economic circumstances and the facility’s status. The calculation of RWA for UL 
is: 
RWA = K × 12.5 × EAD 
22. 
RWA and K in respect of UL for a defaulted exposure under the FIRB or 
supervisory slotting approach is zero. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment B - 22 
Attachment B - Risk components for each asset class 
1. 
An ADI must calculate the risk components PD, LGD, EAD and M in accordance 
with the requirements detailed in this Attachment. An ADI that uses its own PD, 
LGD and EAD estimates for Regulatory Capital purposes must also meet the 
minimum requirements detailed in Attachment D to this Prudential Standard. 
2. 
Where an exposure is guaranteed by a sovereign, and the guarantee meets the 
requirements set out in Attachment E to this Prudential Standard, the floors that 
apply to the risk components do not apply to the portion of the exposure that is 
covered by the sovereign guarantee. 
Probability of default estimates 
3. 
Subject to the exceptions set out in paragraphs 4 and 5 of this Attachment, PD is 
the greater of the PD estimate associated with the internal borrower grade or pool 
to which an exposure is assigned and 0.05 per cent. 
4. 
For QRR exposures, PD is the greater of: 
(a) 
the PD estimate associated with the internal borrower grade or pool to 
which an exposure is assigned; and 
(b) 
0.1 per cent for QRR revolvers or 0.05 per cent for QRR transactors. 
5. 
For sovereign exposures, PD is the PD estimate associated with the internal 
borrower grade to which an exposure is assigned. 
6. 
An ADI must assign a 100 per cent PD to defaulted exposures. 
Loss given default estimates 
7. 
LGD estimates must be measured as a percentage of EAD. 
Senior unsecured exposures and senior exposures secured by ineligible 
collateral under the FIRB approach 
8. 
Subject to the exceptions set out in paragraphs 9 to 11 of this Attachment, an ADI 
that uses the FIRB approach must assign a 50 per cent LGD to all senior exposures 
that are not secured by eligible collateral. For this purpose, eligible collateral is 
collateral that meets the minimum requirements detailed in Attachment E to this 
Prudential Standard.  
9. 
Where an ADI uses the FIRB approach, it may assign lower LGD estimates to 
eligible senior exposures to sovereign counterparties, which are not secured by 
eligible collateral, using the ratings of external credit assessment institutions 
(ECAIs). Where the ECAI is S&P Global Ratings, Moody’s or Fitch Ratings, 
ratings and the relevant LGD must be mapped in accordance with Table 3. Where 
a sovereign exposure has multiple ECAI ratings that correspond to multiple credit 
rating grades, the ADI must apply the requirements detailed in paragraph 6 of 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment B - 23 
Attachment F to APS 112. The ADI must apply the due diligence requirements 
in Attachment F of APS 112 when using the ratings of ECAIs. 
Table 3 
LGD estimates for eligible sovereign exposures 
 
S&P Global 
Ratings 
Moody’s 
Fitch Ratings 
LGD 
(%) 
Credit rating 
grade of 
sovereign 
exposure 
AAA 
AA+ 
AA 
AA- 
Aaa 
Aa1 
Aa2 
Aa3 
AAA 
AA+ 
AA 
AA- 
5 
A+ 
A 
A1 
A2 
A+ 
A 
25 
Unrated exposure to an Australian local council  
 
10. 
For senior exposures to operators of large public infrastructure assets or utilities 
that provide essential services to the economy, and have tripartite arrangements 
with the Commonwealth or are valued based on regulatory asset base, an ADI 
that uses the FIRB approach may assign a:  
(a) 
40 per cent LGD where the operator is a corporate counterparty; or 
(b) 
45 per cent LGD where the operator is a sovereign counterparty that is not 
eligible for the LGD treatment specified in Table 3 or is a financial 
institution. 
11. 
Where an ADI applies the FIRB approach, it may use the supervisory LGD 
estimates and collateral haircuts detailed in Table 4 as inputs to the LGD 
calculation for senior exposures that are not secured by eligible collateral but have 
eligible recovery value. The LGD must be calculated in accordance with the 
methodology detailed in paragraph 16 to 18 of this Attachment, where the LGD 
for the secured portion (LGDSi) is as specified in Table 4 and the LGD for the 
unsecured portion (LGDU) is as specified in paragraph 8 of this Attachment.  
Table 4 
Supervisory LGD estimates and collateral haircuts for exposures with 
eligible recovery value 
 
LGD  
(%) 
HC  
(%) 
Physical collateral that does not meet the 
minimum requirements detailed in 
Attachment E to this Prudential Standard 
Corporate: 40 
Sovereign or 
financial 
institution: 45 
40 
Australian water entitlements 
 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment B - 24 
Senior unsecured exposures under the AIRB approach 
12. 
An ADI that uses the AIRB approach must apply a 50 per cent LGD to all senior 
unsecured exposures. For this purpose, the ADI must have a documented policy 
that details its definition of a senior unsecured exposure.  
Subordinated debt 
13. 
An ADI must assign a 75 per cent LGD to all subordinated debt, aside from junior 
liens over commercial real estate or residential real estate that meet the eligibility 
criteria for recognition as eligible collateral as specified in Attachment E to this 
Prudential Standard. The ADI must have a documented policy that details its 
definition of subordination. At a minimum, the definition must include any 
facility that is expressly subordinated to another facility and also address 
economic subordination. 
Exposures secured by eligible collateral under the FIRB approach 
14. 
Where an ADI applies the FIRB approach, it must use the supervisory LGD 
estimates and collateral haircuts detailed in Table 5 as inputs to the LGD 
calculation for exposures secured by eligible collateral.  
Table 5 
Supervisory LGD estimates and collateral haircuts for exposures 
secured by eligible collateral 
 
LGD (%) 
HC (%) 
Eligible financial collateral 
0 
APS 112 
comprehensive 
approach 
Eligible receivables 
20 
40 
Eligible residential real estate or 
commercial real estate 
20 
40 
Other eligible physical collateral 
25 
40 
 
15. 
For eligible financial collateral, an ADI must apply the haircuts calculated under 
the comprehensive approach as set out in Attachment G to APS 112. These 
haircuts must be adjusted for different holding periods and non-daily remargining 
or revaluation as detailed in that Attachment. 
Methodology for recognition of eligible collateral 
16. 
Where an ADI uses the FIRB approach, the LGD applicable to a collateralised 
transaction must be calculated as the exposure-weighted average of the LGD for 
the unsecured portion (LGDU) and the LGD for the collateralised portion (LGDSi). 
Specifically: 
𝐸𝐸
𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝑃𝑃= 𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝑃𝑃𝑈𝑈×
𝑈𝑈
𝐸𝐸
+ ෍𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝑃𝑃
×
𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆
𝐸𝐸
( + 𝐻𝐻𝐸𝐸)
𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆
 
× 1
𝐸𝐸× (1 + 𝐻𝐻𝐸𝐸)
𝑆𝑆
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment B - 25 
where: 
• E is the current value of the exposure (i.e. cash lent or securities lent or 
posted). In the case of securities lent or posted, the exposure value must be 
increased by applying the appropriate haircuts (HE) according to the 
comprehensive approach for the recognition of financial collateral as detailed 
in Attachment G to APS 112.  
• ESi is the current value of the collateral after applying the appropriate haircuts 
for the type of collateral (HC) and for any currency mismatch between the 
exposure and the collateral. The sum of ESi across all collateral types must be 
capped at the value of 𝐸𝐸× (1 + 𝐻𝐻𝐸𝐸). 
For the purpose of determining ESi for an exposure with a junior lien, the ADI 
must apply the appropriate haircuts to the value of the collateral and then 
reduce it by the sum of all exposures with liens that rank higher than the junior 
liens. In cases where liens are held by third parties that rank pari passu with 
the lien of the ADI, only the proportion of the value of the collateral (after the 
application of haircuts and reductions due to exposures with liens that rank 
higher than the lien of the ADI) that is attributable to the ADI may be 
recognised. 
• 𝐸𝐸𝑈𝑈= 𝐸𝐸× (1 + 𝐻𝐻𝐸𝐸) −∑𝐸𝐸𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆. The terms EU and ESi are only used to calculate 
the LGD applicable to the collateralised transaction. The ADI must continue 
to calculate EAD without taking into account the presence of any collateral, 
unless specified otherwise.  
• LGDU is the LGD applicable to an unsecured exposure as set out in paragraphs 
8 to 10 and 13 of this Attachment.  
• LGDSi is the LGD applicable to an exposure secured by that type of collateral 
as set out in paragraphs 11 and 14 of this Attachment. 
17. 
Where eligible collateral is denominated in a different currency to that of the 
exposure, an ADI must apply a haircut for currency risk (Hfx) in accordance with 
the requirements for the comprehensive approach as detailed in Attachment G to 
APS 112. 
18. 
For the purpose of calculating the LGD applicable to a sovereign exposure that is 
secured by eligible collateral, where applicable, an ADI is permitted to adopt the 
lower of the: 
(a) 
relevant LGD specified in paragraph 9 of this Attachment; and  
(b) 
LGD determined in accordance with paragraph 16 to 17 of this Attachment.  
Corporate exposures under the AIRB approach 
19. 
For corporate exposures subject to the AIRB approach, the LGD for each secured 
or partially secured exposure that is used as an input to the risk-weight function 
and the calculation of EL must not be less than the floors detailed in Table 6. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment B - 26 
However, the floor does not apply to the best estimate of EL for defaulted 
exposures. 
Table 6 
LGD floors for corporate exposures 
Collateral type 
LGD  
(%) 
Secured 
 
Financial collateral 
0 
Receivables 
10 
Commercial or residential real 
estate 
10 
Other physical collateral 
15 
All other collateral 
25 
Unsecured 
25 
 
20. 
The LGD floors for secured exposures specified in Table 6 must be applied where 
an exposure is fully secured (i.e. the value of collateral after applying the haircuts 
specified in Table 5 exceeds the value of the exposure). 
21. 
The LGD floor for a partially secured exposure must be calculated as the 
exposure-weighted average of the LGD floor for the unsecured portion and the 
LGD floor for the secured portion. The following formula must be used for this 
purpose: 
𝐸𝐸
𝐸𝐸
𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝑃𝑃 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓= 𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝑃𝑃𝑈𝑈 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓×
𝑈𝑈
+ 𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝑃𝑃
𝑆𝑆
𝐸𝐸× (1 + 𝐻𝐻)
𝑆𝑆 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓×
 
𝐸𝐸
𝐸𝐸× (1 + 𝐻𝐻𝐸𝐸)
where: 
• LGDU floor and LGDS floor are the floor values for unsecured and fully secured 
exposures as specified in Table 6. 
• The other terms are as defined in paragraphs 14 and 16 of this Attachment. 
Retail exposures 
22. 
For retail exposures, the LGD for each exposure that is used as an input to the 
risk-weight function and the calculation of EL must not be less than the floors 
detailed in Table 7. However, the floor does not apply to the best estimate of EL 
for defaulted exposures. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment B - 27 
Table 7 
LGD floors for retail exposures 
Exposure type 
LGD 
(%) 
Retail residential mortgage 
10 
Other secured  
 
Financial collateral 
0 
Receivables  
10 
Commercial or residential real estate 
10 
Other physical collateral 
15 
All other collateral 
30 
Unsecured 
 
QRR 
50 
All other unsecured 
30 
 
23. 
The LGD floors for secured exposures specified in Table 7 must be applied where 
an exposure is fully secured (i.e. the value of collateral after applying the haircuts 
specified in Table 5 exceeds the value of the exposure). 
24. 
The LGD floor for a partially secured retail exposure must be calculated 
according to the formula set out in paragraph 21 of this Attachment, aside from 
the LGD floor for a retail residential mortgage exposure, which is fixed 
irrespective of the level of collateral provided. 
25. 
An ADI that has approval to use its own estimates of LGD for retail residential 
mortgage exposures must not take into account recoveries from LMI when 
deriving those LGD estimates. The ADI may instead recognise the risk-mitigating 
effect of LMI by applying a 20 per cent reduction to its LGD estimates (subject 
to the floor specified in Table 7) for exposures with a loan-to-valuation ratio, as 
defined in APS 112, of greater than 80 per cent that have LMI cover. 
26. 
An ADI that is not approved to use its own estimates of LGD for retail residential 
mortgage exposures or SME retail exposures secured by residential real estate 
must apply a 20 per cent LGD floor in place of the floor specified in Table 7. 
Exposure at default estimates 
27. 
EAD in respect of each exposure (both on-balance sheet and off-balance sheet) 
must be measured without deducting any provisions for, and partial write-offs of, 
that exposure. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment B - 28 
On-balance sheet exposures 
28. 
Subject to paragraph 31 of this Attachment, EAD for a drawn amount (i.e. an on-
balance sheet exposure) must not be less than the current contractual amount 
owed by the borrower nor should it be less than the sum of: 
(a) 
the amount by which an ADI’s Common Equity Tier 1 Capital would be 
reduced if the exposure were fully written-off; and  
(b) 
any associated provisions and partial write-offs.  
29. 
When the difference between EAD and the sum of the amounts specified in 
paragraphs 28(a) and 28(b) of this Attachment is positive, this amount is termed 
a discount. An ADI must not take into account such discounts when calculating 
RWA. Such discounts may be included in the measurement of eligible provisions 
for the purpose of offsetting EL in calculating the ADI’s Regulatory Capital 
requirement in accordance with Attachment C to this Prudential Standard. 
30. 
Defaulted exposures purchased by an ADI are not subject to  the floor specified 
in paragraph 28 of this Attachment. For those exposures, EAD must be based on 
the exposure’s carrying value and the discount must be set equal to zero.  
31. 
An ADI may recognise on-balance sheet netting of assets and liabilities where it 
meets the criteria detailed in Attachment H to APS 112. Where there is a currency 
or maturity mismatch between the relevant assets and liabilities, adjustments must 
be made in accordance with the treatment set out in APS 112.  
Off-balance sheet exposures except those that expose an ADI to 
counterparty credit risk 
32. 
Where an ADI uses: 
(a) 
supervisory estimates of EAD, EAD for an undrawn commitment is 
calculated as the committed but undrawn amount multiplied by a CCF; and 
(b) 
its own estimates of EAD, EAD for an undrawn commitment may be 
calculated as the committed but undrawn amount multiplied by a CCF or 
derived from a direct estimate of the total facility EAD. 
33. 
CCFs may be applied to the lower of the value of the unused committed credit 
line and the value of any other constraining factor on the availability of the 
facility, such as the existence of a ceiling on the potential lending amount that is 
related to a borrower’s reported cash flow or its external credit rating. If the lower 
value is used, an ADI must have sufficient line monitoring and management 
procedures to support using the lower value for Regulatory Capital purposes. 
34. 
Where an ADI has given a commitment to provide an off-balance sheet exposure, 
it may apply the lower of the CCFs applicable to the commitment and the off-
balance sheet exposure. 
35. 
An ADI must apply the CCFs as specified in Attachment C to APS 112 when 
calculating EAD, with the exception of: 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment B - 29 
(a) 
non-revolving retail exposures categorised as other commitments in 
accordance with Attachment C to APS 112 for which the CCF is 100 per 
cent; and 
(b) 
revolving retail exposures, excluding exposures subject to a CCF of 100 per 
cent in Attachment C to APS 112, for which the ADI may use its own 
estimates of EAD. 
36. 
When only the drawn balances of revolving facilities have been securitised, an 
ADI must ensure that it continues to hold capital against the undrawn balances 
associated with the securitised exposure.  
Revolving retail exposures 
37. 
Where an ADI uses its own estimates of EAD for revolving retail exposures, EAD 
for each exposure that is used as an input to the risk-weight function and the 
calculation of EL must not be less than the sum of: 
(a) 
the on-balance sheet amount; and  
(b) 
50 per cent of the off-balance sheet exposure using the applicable CCF in 
Attachment C to APS 112. 
38. 
To the extent that foreign exchange and interest rate commitments exist within an 
ADI’s retail IRB asset class, the ADI is not permitted to use its internal estimates 
of EAD for those commitments and must instead apply the CCFs as specified in 
Attachment C to APS 112. 
Off-balance sheet exposures that expose an ADI to counterparty credit 
risk 
39. 
For off-balance sheet exposures that expose an ADI to counterparty credit risk, 
including over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives (as defined in APS 112), exchange-
traded derivatives, and long settlement transactions, the ADI must calculate EAD 
according to the requirements set out in APS 180.  
Effective maturity 
40. 
For corporate, sovereign and financial institution exposures, an ADI must 
calculate M for each facility. Subject to paragraph 42 of this Attachment, M is the 
greater of one year and the remaining maturity in years as defined in paragraph 
41 of this Attachment. In all cases, M is no greater than five years. 
41. 
For an exposure subject to a specified cash flow schedule, M is defined as: 
∑t ×CFt
M =
t
∑CFt
t
 
where: 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment B - 30 
• CFt denotes the cash flows contractually payable by the borrower in period t 
and t is expressed in years. 
An ADI must apply a floor of zero to CFt where the cash flow is negative (i.e. 
payable by the ADI to the borrower), which can occur with some derivative 
transactions.  
42. 
Where an ADI is not able to calculate M for the contracted payments, it must use 
a more conservative measure that equals the maximum remaining time that the 
borrower is permitted to take to fully discharge its contractual obligations under 
the terms of the facility agreement, up to a maximum of five years.  
43. 
Where amounts have been drawn by a borrower under a committed facility and 
the maturity of the drawn amount is less than the maturity of the facility, the 
maturity of the facility must be used for determining the capital requirement. 
44. 
When determining M for derivatives that are subject to a master netting 
agreement, an ADI must use the weighted average maturity of the derivatives. In 
this case, the notional amount of each derivative transaction should be used for 
the purpose of determining the weighted average maturity. 
Exceptions to the one-year maturity floor 
45. 
For certain short-term exposures, the one-year floor for maturity may be replaced 
by a one-day floor. The maturity of such transactions must be calculated as the 
greater of one day and M. 
46. 
The one-year floor does not apply to the following exposures: 
(a) 
collateralised capital-market-driven transactions (e.g. OTC derivative 
transactions and margin lending) and SFTs with an original maturity of less 
than one year, where the relevant documentation contains daily remargining 
clauses. The relevant documentation must also require daily revaluation and 
include provisions that allow for the prompt liquidation or set-off of 
collateral in the event of default or failure to remargin. Where these 
transactions are subject to a master netting agreement, the effective maturity 
is calculated as the weighted average maturity of the transactions. In this 
case, a floor equal to the minimum holding period for the transaction type 
as set out in Table 24 of Attachment G to APS 112 will apply. Where more 
than one transaction type is contained in the master netting agreement, a 
floor equal to the highest holding period will apply to the average. The 
notional amount of each transaction must be used in determining the 
weighted-average maturity; 
(b) 
issued and confirmed trade letters of credit and other forms of trade 
financing that have a maturity of less than one year and are self-liquidating; 
and 
(c) 
other short-term transactions with an original maturity of less than one year 
that are not part of an ADI’s ongoing financing of a borrower.  
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment B - 31 
The ADI must have policies that detail the transactions where the one-day 
maturity floor is appropriate. 
Treatment of guarantees and credit derivatives 
47. 
To recognise guarantees and credit derivatives as eligible CRM, an ADI must 
meet the minimum requirements detailed in Attachment E to this Prudential 
Standard. 
48. 
An ADI may recognise the risk-mitigating effect of guarantees and credit 
derivatives by applying either a FIRB, AIRB or retail IRB substitution approach. 
The ADI’s application of the substitution approaches is constrained in the same 
manner as a direct exposure to the guarantor or credit protection provider, such 
that: 
(a) 
if the ADI applies the FIRB approach to a direct exposure to a guarantor or 
credit protection provider, it may only recognise the guarantee or credit 
derivative according to the FIRB substitution approach; and 
(b) 
if the ADI applies the standardised approach to credit risk to a direct 
exposure to a guarantor or credit protection provider, it may only recognise 
the guarantee or credit derivative by applying the standardised approach to 
the covered portion of the exposure. In this case, the ADI must apply the 
scope of guarantors and credit protection providers and minimum 
requirements for the recognition of guarantees and credit derivatives as set 
out in Attachments I and J to APS 112.  
49. 
The application of CRM in the form of guarantees and credit derivatives must not 
reflect the effect of double default nor result in an adjusted risk weight that is less 
than that of a comparable direct exposure to the guarantor or credit protection 
provider.  
50. 
In calculating the risk weight for the covered portion of the exposure: 
(a) 
the effective maturity of a corporate, sovereign or financial institution 
exposure must be the same as the effective maturity of the exposure as if it 
were not covered; 
(b) 
an ADI must use the same PD, LGD and EAD estimates for calculating EL 
as it uses for calculating RWA for UL; and 
(c) 
where the risk-mitigating effect of guarantees or credit derivatives is 
recognised through PD, the ADI must use the risk-weight function 
appropriate to the guarantor or credit protection provider. 
51. 
The uncovered portion of the exposure must be assigned a risk weight that is 
calculated in the same manner as a direct exposure to the underlying borrower. 
52. 
Where proportional or tranched coverage exists, or where there is a currency or 
maturity mismatch between the underlying exposure and the guarantee or credit 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment B - 32 
derivative, the approach set out in paragraphs 7 to 15 of Attachment I and 
paragraphs 14 to 22 of Attachment J to APS 112 must be applied. 
Recognition under the FIRB substitution approach 
53. 
Under the FIRB substitution approach, an ADI must determine the risk weight of 
the covered portion of the exposure by using the PD appropriate to the guarantor 
or credit protection provider’s borrower grade. The ADI may also replace the 
LGD of the underlying exposure with the LGD applicable to the guarantee or 
credit derivative taking into account its seniority and any eligible collateral 
calculated in accordance with this Attachment. 
Recognition under the AIRB or retail IRB substitution approach 
54. 
Under the AIRB or retail IRB substitution approach, an ADI may recognise the 
risk-mitigating effect of guarantees and credit derivatives by adjusting either PD 
or LGD estimates; however, in all cases, only one risk component may be 
adjusted. Whether adjustments are made through PD or LGD, they must be made 
in a consistent manner over time and for a given type of guarantee or credit 
derivative. 
Maturity mismatch 
55. 
Where a maturity mismatch exists between:  
(a) 
the residual maturity of the term of lodgement of collateral and the maturity 
of the exposure covered by the collateral, the ADI must apply the 
adjustment detailed in paragraph 27 of Attachment G to APS 112; 
(b) 
the residual maturity of a guarantee and the maturity of the exposure 
covered by the guarantee, the ADI must apply the adjustment detailed in 
paragraph 15 of Attachment I to APS 112; or 
(c) 
the residual maturity of a purchased credit derivative and the maturity of 
the exposure covered by the derivatives, the ADI must apply the adjustment 
detailed in paragraph 22 of Attachment J to APS 112. 
Treatment of securities financing transactions 
56. 
For the purpose of calculating RWA and EL amounts for SFTs, including 
securities lending transactions, an ADI must calculate: 
(a) 
the LGD of the counterparty in accordance with this Attachment;  
(b) 
EAD in accordance with Attachment G to APS 112; and 
(c) 
the capital requirement for the credit risk or market risk inherent in any 
securities the ADI lends or posts as collateral, if that risk remains with the 
ADI.
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment C - 33 
Attachment C - Treatment of expected losses and 
provisions 
Calculation of expected loss 
1. 
An ADI must separately calculate, for non-defaulted and defaulted exposures, the 
total EL amount aggregated across the corporate, sovereign, financial institution 
and retail IRB asset classes. Other than for specialised lending exposures subject 
to the supervisory slotting approach, the EL amount must be calculated as 
follows: 
(a) 
for non-defaulted exposures, the product of PD, LGD and EAD; 
(b) 
for defaulted exposures under the AIRB or retail IRB approach, the ADI’s 
best estimate of EL given current economic circumstances and the facility’s 
status;6 and 
(c) 
for defaulted exposures under the FIRB approach, the product of the 
relevant supervisory estimates of LGD and EAD.  
Expected loss for specialised lending exposures subject to 
the supervisory slotting approach 
2. 
For specialised lending exposures subject to the supervisory slotting approach, 
the EL amount must be calculated by multiplying EAD by the relevant factor 
specified in Table 8. 
Table 8 
EL under the supervisory slotting approach 
 
Strong 
Good 
Satisfactory 
Weak 
Default 
Specialised 
lending 
0.4% 
0.8% 
2.8% 
8% 
50% 
 
Calculation of eligible provisions 
3. 
For exposures in the IRB asset classes, total eligible provisions associated with 
those exposures are: 
(a) 
credit related provisions (e.g. any provisions for non-defaulted or defaulted 
exposures). Any amount included in an ADI’s provisions for non-defaulted 
exposures may only be used as eligible provisions to offset EL for non-
defaulted exposures;  
(b) 
partial write-offs; and  
                                                 
6  
Refer to paragraph 102 of Attachment D to this Prudential Standard.  
 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment C - 34 
(c) 
discounts on defaulted assets.7 
Provisions held against securitisation exposures must not be included in total 
eligible provisions. 
4. 
Where an ADI uses the standardised approach to credit risk for a portion of its 
exposures, it must attribute total provisions on a pro rata basis according to the 
proportion of RWA subject to the standardised and IRB approaches.  
5. 
Where the standardised approach to credit risk is used exclusively by an entity 
within the Level 2 group, all of the provisions booked within that entity must be 
attributed to the standardised approach.  
6. 
Provisions that are booked by entities within the Level 2 group that exclusively 
use an IRB approach to credit risk qualify as eligible provisions under paragraph 
3 of this Attachment. 
Treatment of expected loss and provisions 
7. 
An ADI must separately compare the total EL amount for defaulted exposures 
and non-defaulted exposures with total eligible provisions associated with the 
relevant exposures. 
8. 
Where the total EL amount is higher than total eligible provisions for the relevant 
exposures, the difference must be deducted from Common Equity Tier 1 Capital 
as detailed in APS 111. 
9. 
For non-defaulted exposures, where the total EL amount is lower than eligible 
provisions associated with these exposures, the difference may be included in 
Tier 2 Capital up to a maximum of 0.6 per cent of credit RWA calculated under 
the IRB approach as detailed in APS 111. 
 
                                                 
7  
Refer to paragraph 30 of Attachment B to this Prudential Standard. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment D - 35 
Attachment D - Minimum requirements for the use of 
an IRB approach 
1. 
The minimum requirements set out in this Attachment apply to all IRB exposures 
and the FIRB, AIRB, retail IRB and supervisory slotting approaches, unless stated 
otherwise. An ADI must ensure that the minimum requirements are met at the 
time of IRB approval by APRA and on an ongoing basis.  
Composition of minimum requirements 
2. 
An ADI’s credit risk rating and associated risk estimation systems and processes 
must provide for a meaningful assessment of borrower and transaction 
characteristics, a meaningful differentiation and ranking of risk, and quantitative 
estimates of risk that are consistent, verifiable, relevant and soundly based. The 
internal ratings and quantitative risk estimates associated with those systems and 
processes must play an essential role in the ADI’s risk management and decision-
making processes.  
3. 
An ADI must adhere to the overall requirements for rating system design, 
operation, controls, governance and use as well as the requirements for the 
quantification and validation of PD estimates. An ADI that uses its own estimates 
of LGD and EAD must also meet the incremental minimum requirements relating 
to those risk components. 
Rating system design 
4. 
Within each relevant IRB asset class, an ADI may utilise multiple rating 
methodologies or systems. If the ADI chooses to use multiple methodologies or 
systems, the rationale for assigning a borrower to a rating methodology or system 
must be documented and applied in a manner that best reflects the level of risk of 
the borrower. The ADI must not allocate borrowers across rating methodologies 
or systems for the primary purpose of minimising its capital requirement.  
Rating dimensions 
Requirements for corporate, sovereign and financial institution exposures 
5. 
An internal rating system for corporate, sovereign and financial institution 
exposures must have two separate and distinct dimensions: 
(a) 
the risk of borrower default (borrower grade); and 
(b) 
transaction-specific factors (facility grade). 
6. 
The borrower grade must be oriented to the risk of borrower default; that is, it 
must solely reflect PD. Subject to the exceptions set out in paragraph 7 of this 
Attachment, an ADI must assign the same borrower grade to separate exposures 
to the same borrower irrespective of any differences in the nature of each specific 
transaction.  
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment D - 36 
7. 
An ADI may assign different borrower grades to separate exposures to the same 
borrower in the following circumstances: 
(a) 
in the case of country transfer risk, the ADI may assign different borrower 
grades depending on whether the facility is denominated in domestic or 
foreign currency; and 
(b) 
where the treatment of associated guarantees or credit derivatives to a 
facility is reflected in an adjustment to the borrower grade.  
8. 
A borrower grade must represent an assessment of borrower risk on the basis of 
a specified and distinct set of rating criteria from which estimates of PD are 
derived. An ADI’s credit policies must articulate the:  
(a) 
relationship between borrower grades in terms of the level of credit risk 
each grade implies. Perceived and measured credit risk must increase as 
credit quality declines from one grade to the next; and  
(b) 
credit risk of each borrower grade in terms of both a description of the 
default risk typical for borrowers assigned to the grade and the criteria used 
to distinguish that level of credit risk. Modifiers such as ‘+’ or ‘-’ to alpha 
or numeric borrower grades will only qualify as distinct grades if the ADI 
has developed complete rating descriptions and criteria for their assignment 
and separately quantifies PD estimates for those modified grades. 
9. 
The facility grade must reflect transaction-specific factors such as collateral, 
seniority and product type; that is, it must solely reflect LGD. Borrower 
characteristics may be included as LGD rating criteria only to the extent that they 
are predictive of LGD. However, under the FIRB approach an ADI may satisfy 
this requirement by using a facility grade dimension that reflects both borrower 
and transaction-specific factors. The criteria used to define facility grades must 
be grounded in empirical evidence. 
10. 
Specialised lending exposures subject to the supervisory slotting approach are 
excluded from the two-dimensional rating requirement. In this case, an ADI may 
have a single rating dimension that reflects EL by incorporating both PD and LGD 
considerations. 
Requirements for retail exposures 
11. 
Rating systems for retail exposures must be oriented to both borrower and 
transaction risks and capture all relevant borrower and transaction characteristics. 
An ADI must assign retail exposures into particular pools separately reflecting 
PD, LGD and EAD. The ADI must ensure that this process provides for a 
meaningful differentiation and ranking of risk, a grouping of sufficiently 
homogenous exposures, and accurate and consistent estimation of PD, LGD and 
EAD at the pool level. Different pools of retail exposures may share identical PD, 
LGD or EAD estimates. 
12. 
At a minimum, an ADI must consider the following risk drivers when assigning 
retail exposures to a pool: 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment D - 37 
(a) 
borrower risk characteristics (e.g. borrower type, demographics such as age 
and occupation); 
(b) 
transaction risk characteristics including product or collateral (e.g. loan-to-
valuation measures, seasoning, guarantees or credit derivatives and 
seniority (first or second liens)). The ADI must explicitly address cross-
collateral provisions where present; and 
(c) 
delinquency of the exposure. The ADI must be able to separately identify 
exposures that are delinquent and those that are not.  
13. 
For each pool where an ADI estimates PD and LGD, it must analyse the 
representativeness of the age of facilities (in terms of the time since origination 
for PD and the time since default for LGD) in the data used to derive the estimates. 
The ADI must adjust its estimates upward to account for a lack of 
representativeness in the data as well as anticipated implications of rapid 
exposure growth that may lead to default rates peaking several years after 
origination.  
Rating structure 
Requirements for corporate, sovereign and financial institution exposures 
14. 
An ADI must have a sufficient number of distinct rating grades to allow for a 
meaningful distribution of exposures, with no excessive concentrations in either 
its borrower grades or, where relevant, facility grades. 
15. 
Subject to the exception set out in paragraph 17 of this Attachment, an ADI must 
have a minimum of seven borrower grades for non-defaulted borrowers and one 
for defaulted borrowers. An ADI with lending activities focused on a particular 
market segment may satisfy this requirement with the minimum number of 
grades. An ADI that lends to borrowers of diverse credit quality should have a 
greater number of borrower grades. Significant concentrations within a single 
borrower grade or grades must be supported by empirical evidence that the grade 
or grades cover reasonably narrow PD bands and that the default risk posed by 
borrowers in each grade fall within the relevant band.  
16. 
There is no minimum number of facility grades for an ADI using the AIRB 
approach; however, the ADI must have a sufficient number of facility grades to 
avoid grouping facilities with widely varying LGD estimates into a single grade.  
17. 
An ADI using the supervisory slotting approach for specialised lending exposures 
must have at least four rating grades for non-defaulted borrowers and one for 
defaulted borrowers.  
Requirements for retail exposures 
18. 
An ADI must be able to provide quantitative measures of PD, LGD and EAD for 
each identified pool of retail exposures. The level of differentiation must ensure 
that the number of exposures in a given pool is sufficient to allow for meaningful 
quantification and validation of PD, LGD and EAD estimates at the pool level. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment D - 38 
There must also be a meaningful distribution of exposures across pools, with no 
single pool comprising an undue concentration of exposures. 
Rating criteria 
Requirements for all exposures 
19. 
An ADI must have specific rating definitions, processes and criteria for assigning 
exposures to grades or pools within a rating system. The rating definitions and 
criteria must be plausible, intuitive and result in a meaningful differentiation of 
risk. 
20. 
An ADI’s internal rating descriptions and criteria must be sufficiently detailed to 
allow officers to consistently assign the same rating to borrowers and facilities 
posing similar risk, across lines of business, departments and geographic 
locations. If rating criteria and processes differ for different types of borrowers or 
facilities, the ADI must monitor for possible inconsistency in rating assignments 
and alter rating criteria and processes to improve consistency where appropriate. 
21. 
Rating definitions must be sufficiently clear and detailed to allow independent 
third parties, including APRA, to understand the assignment of ratings, replicate 
rating assignments and evaluate the appropriateness of the assignment of 
exposures to grades or pools. 
22. 
The rating criteria must be consistent with an ADI’s lending standards and its 
policies for managing borrowers and facilities that have deteriorated in credit 
quality. 
23. 
An ADI must use all relevant, material and available information in assigning 
borrowers and facilities to grades or pools. The information used by the ADI must 
be current. The less information the ADI has, the more conservative it must be in 
assigning exposures to borrower and facility grades or pools. An external rating 
may be used as an input into the assignment process; however, the ADI must 
ensure that it considers all other relevant material information. 
Additional requirements for specialised lending exposures subject to the 
supervisory slotting approach 
24. 
An ADI using the supervisory slotting approach must assign specialised lending 
exposures to its internal rating grades based on its own criteria, systems and 
processes. The ADI must also have a documented process that maps those internal 
rating grades into the slotting categories of strong, good, satisfactory, weak and 
default in a conservative and consistent manner. The ADI must ensure that its 
mapping process results in an alignment of grades that is consistent with the 
criteria defining the slotting categories as detailed in Attachment G to this 
Prudential Standard. The ADI must ensure that overrides of its internal criteria do 
not render the mapping process ineffective. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment D - 39 
Rating assignment horizon 
25. 
Although the time horizon required for PD estimation is one year,8 an ADI must 
use a longer time horizon when assigning borrowers to borrower grades or 
exposures to pools. 
26. 
A borrower grade or pool must represent an ADI’s assessment of the borrower’s 
ability and willingness to perform contractually despite adverse economic 
conditions or the occurrence of unexpected events. The range of economic 
conditions that are considered when making assessments must be consistent with 
current conditions and those that are likely to occur over a business cycle within 
the respective industry or geographic region. Rating systems should be designed 
in such a way that idiosyncratic or industry-specific changes are a driver of 
migrations from one category to another, and business cycle effects may also be 
a driver. 
27. 
An ADI’s PD estimates for hedge funds, other highly leveraged financial 
institutions or borrowers whose assets are predominantly traded assets must 
reflect the performance of the underlying assets based on periods of stressed 
volatilities. For this purpose, a highly leveraged financial institution means a 
financial institution that exhibits the following characteristics: 
(a) 
use of investment strategies that are intended to generate returns with low 
correlation to equity and bond indices, or that involve complex investment 
structures; 
(b) 
use of high leverage to increase returns;  
(c) 
use of derivatives for speculative purposes; 
(d) 
use of short selling; or 
(e) 
a material element of its fees is performance related.  
28. 
Given the difficulties in forecasting future events and the influence that they could 
have on a particular borrower’s financial condition, an ADI must take a 
conservative view of projected information. Where limited data are available, the 
ADI must adopt a conservative bias in its analysis. 
Use of statistical models in the rating process 
29. 
The requirements in paragraphs 30 to 35 of this Attachment apply to statistical 
models and other mechanical methods used to assign borrower or facility grades 
or pools, and in the estimation of PD, LGD and EAD. 
30. 
Credit scoring models and other mechanical methods are permissible as the 
primary or partial basis of rating assignments and may play a role in the 
estimation of PD, LGD and EAD under the IRB approach. However, human 
judgement and oversight must also be used to ensure that all relevant and material 
information, including that which is outside the scope of any such model or other 
                                                 
8  
Refer to paragraph 75 of this Attachment. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment D - 40 
mechanical method, is also taken into consideration and that the model or other 
method is used appropriately. An ADI must have written guidance detailing how 
human judgement and model results are combined. 
31. 
Where an ADI uses a statistical model or other mechanical method in its rating 
process, the ADI must ensure that the model or other method has good predictive 
power and that the Regulatory Capital requirement will not be distorted as a result 
of its use. The variables that are used in the model or other method must form a 
reasonable set of predictors. On average, the model must be accurate across the 
range of borrowers or facilities to which the ADI is exposed. There must be no 
known material biases. 
32. 
An ADI must have in place a process for vetting data inputs into a statistical 
model, which includes an assessment of the accuracy, completeness and 
appropriateness of the data specific to the assignment of a borrower or facility 
grade or pool.  
33. 
An ADI must ensure that the data used to build its models are representative of 
the population of the ADI’s borrowers and facilities.  
34. 
An ADI must have documented policies and procedures for reviewing model-
based rating assignments. These policies and procedures must focus on finding 
and limiting errors associated with known model weaknesses. The ADI must 
make credible ongoing efforts to improve the model’s performance. 
35. 
An ADI must undertake a regular cycle of model validation that includes 
monitoring model performance and stability, reviewing model relationships and 
testing model outputs against outcomes.  
Documentation of rating system design 
36. 
An ADI must document the design and operational details of its rating systems. 
Documentation must evidence the ADI’s compliance with minimum 
requirements and address:  
(a) 
portfolio differentiation;  
(b) 
rating criteria;  
(c) 
responsibilities of parties that assign ratings to borrowers and facilities;  
(d) 
the definition of what constitutes a rating override;  
(e) 
parties that have the authority to approve overrides;  
(f) 
frequency of rating reviews; and 
(g) 
management oversight of the rating process.  
37. 
An ADI must document the rationale for its choice of internal rating criteria and 
must be able to provide analysis demonstrating that its rating criteria and 
procedures are likely to result in ratings that meaningfully differentiate risk. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment D - 41 
These rating criteria and procedures must be periodically reviewed to determine 
whether they remain fully applicable to the current portfolio and to external 
conditions. 
38. 
An ADI must document the history of major changes in its credit risk rating 
process and such documentation must support identification of changes made to 
the rating process.  
39. 
The organisation of rating assignment, including the internal control structure, 
must be documented. 
40. 
An ADI must document the specific definitions of default and loss that are used 
internally and ensure consistency with the reference definitions set out in this 
Attachment. 
41. 
Where an ADI employs statistical models in its rating process, it must document 
its methodologies. This documentation must include: 
(a) 
a detailed outline of the theory, assumptions or mathematical and empirical 
basis of the assignment of estimates to grades, individual borrowers, 
exposures or pools, and the data sources used to estimate the model; 
(b) 
details of the statistical process (including out-of-time and out-of-sample 
performance tests) for validating the model; and 
(c) 
any circumstances under which the model does not work effectively.  
42. 
Where an ADI uses a third-party vendor model, the ADI must still comply with 
all of the requirements detailed in this Attachment, irrespective of any claims of 
proprietary technology or information by the third-party vendor. 
Rating system operations 
Rating coverage 
43. 
For corporate, sovereign and financial institution exposures, each borrower and 
eligible guarantor or credit protection provider must be assigned a borrower grade 
and each exposure must be associated with a facility grade as part of the loan 
approval process. Similarly, for retail exposures, each exposure must be assigned 
to a pool as part of the loan approval process. 
44. 
Each separate legal entity to which an ADI is exposed must be separately rated. 
The ADI must have documented policies regarding the treatment of individual 
entities in a connected group, including the circumstances under which the same 
rating may or may not be assigned to some or all related entities. Those policies 
must include a process to identify, monitor and control specific wrong-way risk 
for each legal entity to which the ADI is exposed.  An ADI must treat transactions 
9
                                                 
9  
Specific wrong-way risk means the risk that arises when the exposure to a particular counterparty 
is positively correlated with the probability of default of the counterparty due to the nature of the 
transactions with the counterparty. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment D - 42 
in which it has identified specific wrong way risk differently when calculating 
EAD. 
Integrity of the rating process 
Requirements for corporate, sovereign and financial institution exposures 
45. 
Rating assignments and periodic rating reviews must be completed or approved 
by a party that does not directly stand to benefit from the extension of credit. An 
ADI’s policies and procedures must document how independence of the rating 
assignment process is ensured.  
46. 
The assignment of borrower and facility ratings must be reviewed and refreshed 
on at least an annual basis. Certain exposures, especially higher risk borrowers or 
problem exposures, must be subject to more frequent rating review. In addition, 
an ADI must initiate a new rating review when material information on the 
borrower or facility comes to light. 
47. 
An ADI must have an effective process for obtaining and updating relevant and 
material information on the borrower’s financial condition and other 
characteristics that affect assigned estimates of PD, LGD and EAD. The ADI 
must also have a procedure for updating borrower and facility ratings in a timely 
fashion when relevant information is received. 
Requirements for retail exposures 
48. 
An ADI must review the loss characteristics and delinquency status of each 
identified pool on at least an annual basis. This must include a review of the status 
of individual borrowers within each pool as a means of ensuring that exposures 
continue to be assigned to the correct pool. 
Overrides 
49. 
For rating assignments based on expert judgement, an ADI must clearly document 
the situations in which officers may override the outputs of the rating process, 
including how and to what extent such overrides can be made and by whom. 
50. 
For model-based ratings, an ADI must have guidelines and processes for 
monitoring cases where human judgement has overridden the model’s rating, 
variables that were excluded or inputs that were altered. Those guidelines must 
include identifying personnel who are responsible for approving such overrides. 
51. 
An ADI must have systems that identify overrides and separately track their 
nature and performance. 
Data maintenance 
Requirements for all exposures 
52. 
An ADI must collect and store data, including on key borrower and facility 
characteristics, of sufficient detail, scope, reliability and consistency to support 
its internal credit risk measurement and management processes, enable the ADI 
to meet the requirements of this Prudential Standard and serve as a basis for 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment D - 43 
regulatory reporting and the relevant disclosure requirements detailed in 
Prudential Standard APS 330 Public Disclosure. The data must be sufficiently 
detailed to facilitate ongoing improvements to the ADI’s rating systems and 
enable retrospective re-rating of borrowers and facilities when such 
improvements are envisaged. 
53. 
Where an ADI sells a credit obligation at a material credit-related economic loss, 
the ADI must: 
(a) 
maintain an internal register of these credit obligations; 
(b) 
consider the data contained in the register in its rating system design and 
validation processes. The subsequent inclusion in, or exclusion from, those 
processes of any data contained in the register must be justified by the ADI 
and must not result in lower LGD estimates; and 
(c) 
ensure that the creation and use of data contained in the register is 
transparent to independent reviewers of the ADI’s rating systems, such as 
the ADI’s internal or external auditors and APRA. 
Additional requirements for corporate, sovereign and financial institution 
exposures 
54. 
An ADI must maintain rating histories of borrowers and eligible guarantors or 
credit protection providers, including initial and subsequent ratings, the dates that 
ratings were assigned, the methodology and key data used to derive ratings and 
the officer responsible for the most recent rating. 
55. 
An ADI must retain data on PD estimates, rating migrations and realised default 
rates associated with borrower grades.  
56. 
An ADI using the AIRB approach must maintain a history of data on LGD 
estimates associated with each facility, the methodology and key data used to 
derive LGD estimates, the officer responsible for the most recent rating, and 
realised LGD rates associated with each defaulted facility. 
57. 
Where an ADI uses the AIRB approach and reflects the risk-mitigating effects of 
guarantees or credit derivatives through its LGD estimates, it must retain data on 
the LGD of the facility before and after evaluation of the effects of the guarantee 
or credit derivative. 
58. 
For each defaulted exposure, an ADI must retain information about the identity 
of the borrower and facility, the timing and circumstances of the default, and the 
components of loss and recovery, including amounts and sources of recoveries 
(e.g. collateral, liquidation proceeds and guarantees or credit derivatives), timing 
of cash flows and administrative costs. 
59. 
Where an ADI uses supervisory estimates for LGD or EAD, it must retain 
sufficient data to validate the supervisory estimates. 
60. 
An ADI must retain data on realised losses for specialised lending exposures 
subject to the supervisory slotting approach. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment D - 44 
Additional requirements for retail exposures 
61. 
An ADI must retain data used in the process of allocating retail exposures to 
pools. This includes data on borrower and transaction risk characteristics used 
either directly or through the use of a model as well as data on delinquency. 
62. 
An ADI must retain data on PD, LGD and EAD estimates associated with its 
pools of retail exposures. 
63. 
An ADI must retain data on loss rates in order to allow analysis of the volatility 
of loss rates for exposures in the QRR asset class compared to other types of retail 
lending. 
64. 
For defaulted exposures, an ADI must retain data on the pools to which the retail 
exposure was assigned over the year prior to default and the realised outcomes on 
LGD and EAD. 
Stress tests in the assessment of capital adequacy 
65. 
An ADI must have sound stress testing processes in place for use in the 
assessment of its capital adequacy, including the sufficiency of the IRB capital 
requirement. Stress testing must include: 
(a) 
the identification of possible events or severe changes in economic 
conditions that could have unfavourable effects on the ADI’s credit 
exposures; and 
(b) 
an assessment of the ADI’s ability to withstand such events or changes. 
66. 
An ADI must also perform one or more credit risk stress tests to assess the effect 
of certain conditions on its IRB capital requirement. For this purpose, the ADI 
must, at a minimum, consider the effect of mild recession scenarios. The stress 
tests must be meaningful and conservative. 
Use of internal ratings 
67. 
Internal ratings and PD, LGD and EAD estimates must play an integral role in 
the credit approval, risk management, internal capital allocation and governance 
functions of an ADI. Rating systems and estimates designed and implemented 
exclusively for the purpose of qualifying for an IRB approach and used only to 
provide IRB inputs are not acceptable.  
68. 
Where there are differences between the credit risk estimates used by an ADI for 
Regulatory Capital and internal purposes, the ADI must: 
(a) 
ensure that the data sources and methodologies utilised for determining its 
internal credit risk estimates are consistent with the estimates used to 
determine the Regulatory Capital requirement; and  
(b) 
be able to justify, to APRA’s satisfaction, the reasonableness of those 
differences. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment D - 45 
Risk quantification 
Overall requirements for estimation 
69. 
Internal estimates of PD, LGD and EAD must be reviewed on at least an annual 
basis and incorporate all relevant, material and available data and other 
information. In determining these estimates, an ADI may utilise internal data and 
relevant data from external sources (including pooled data). 
70. 
Estimates must be grounded in historical experience and empirical evidence, and 
not based purely on subjective considerations. Changes in an ADI’s lending and 
collection practices over the observation period must be taken into account. 
Estimates must be forward looking and responsive to changes in credit quality 
ahead of loss experience rather than lag such experience. The ADI’s estimates 
must reflect the implications of technical advances, new data and other 
information as it becomes available. Where industry estimation practices evolve 
and improve over time, the ADI should consider these developments in assessing 
its own practices. 
71. 
In order to avoid over-optimism in PD, LGD and EAD estimates, an ADI must 
add a margin of conservatism to its estimates that reflects the likely range of 
errors. Where methods and data are less satisfactory and the likely range of errors 
is larger, the margin of conservatism must be larger. 
Definition of default 
72. 
An ADI must record actual defaults using the reference definition of default 
detailed in APS 220.10 The ADI must also use the reference definition of default 
for the estimation of PD and, where relevant, LGD and EAD (though this does 
not preclude the possibility of materiality considerations entering into the 
estimation process). In arriving at its estimates, the ADI may use external data 
that are not consistent with the reference definition of default provided it makes 
appropriate adjustments to the data to achieve broad equivalence with the 
reference definition. This same requirement also applies to any internal data 
collected prior to 1 January 2008. Internal data (including that pooled by a number 
of ADIs) collected subsequent to 1 January 2008 must be consistent with the 
reference definition of default. 
Re-aging 
73. 
An ADI must have clearly documented policies in respect of the counting of days 
past due and, in particular, in respect of the re-aging of facilities and the granting 
of extensions, deferrals, renewals and rewrites to existing accounts. Where the 
ADI treats a re-aged exposure in a similar fashion to other exposures that are 
considered to be in default, that exposure must be recorded as defaulted for 
Regulatory Capital purposes. 
                                                 
10  
For this purpose, the reference definition of default refers to ‘non-performing’ as set out in APS 
220.  
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment D - 46 
Risk quantification requirements specific to probability of default 
estimation 
Requirements for all exposures 
74. 
An ADI must estimate PD for each internal borrower grade for corporate, 
sovereign and financial institution exposures and for each pool of retail 
exposures.11  
75. 
PD estimates must be calibrated to a long-run average of one-year default rates 
(one-year PD) for borrowers in each borrower grade and for exposures in each 
pool. 
76. 
An ADI must estimate PD for each borrower grade or pool based on the observed 
historical one-year default rate that is calculated as a simple average based on the 
number of borrowers or facilities (that is, count weighted). Weighting approaches 
such as EAD weighting are not permitted. 
77. 
The length of the underlying historical observation period used for the estimation 
of PD must be at least five years for at least one data source. If the available 
observations from any source span a longer period, and the data are relevant, this 
longer period must be used. The data should include a representative mix of good 
and bad years of the economic cycle relevant for the portfolio. 
Additional requirements for corporate, sovereign and financial institution 
exposures 
78. 
When estimating PD for each borrower grade, an ADI must use information and 
techniques that take appropriate account of long-run experience. These 
techniques may include the use of internal default experience, mapping to 
external data and statistical models. The ADI may have a primary PD estimation 
technique and use other techniques as a point of comparison and potential 
adjustment. The mechanical application of a technique without supporting 
analysis is not sufficient. The ADI must recognise the importance of judgemental 
considerations in combining the results of techniques and in making adjustments 
for limitations of techniques and information. 
Additional requirements for retail exposures 
79. 
An ADI must use internal data as the primary source of information for estimating 
PD for retail exposures. The ADI may use other data sources for PD 
quantification provided a strong link can be demonstrated between its: 
(a) 
process of assigning retail exposures to a pool and the process used by the 
other data source; and 
(b) 
internal risk profile and the composition of the other data. 
                                                 
11  
An ADI is not required to produce its own estimates of PD for specialised lending exposures 
subject to the supervisory slotting approach. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment D - 47 
In all cases, the ADI must use all relevant and material data sources as points of 
comparison. 
Risk quantification requirements specific to loss given default 
estimation 
Requirements for all exposures 
80. 
An ADI must estimate LGD based on a measure of economic loss. The ADI must 
take into account all relevant factors when measuring economic loss including 
material discount effects and material direct and indirect costs associated with 
collecting on an exposure. The ADI must not simply measure the loss recorded 
in its accounting records for LGD purposes, although it must be able to reconcile 
accounting and economic loss. 
81. 
An ADI may make adjustments to its LGD estimates to reflect its own workout 
and collection expertise. Such adjustments must be supported by sufficient 
internal empirical evidence. 
82. 
LGD estimates must take into account additional drawings after the time of 
default. 
83. 
LGD estimates must reflect economic downturn conditions. That is, an ADI must 
take into account the potential for LGD to be higher than average during a period 
when defaults or credit losses are substantially higher than average. 
84. 
Where loss severities do not exhibit cyclical variability, LGD estimates must not 
be less than the long-run default-weighted average LGD calculated as the average 
loss of all observed defaults within a data source for that type of exposure. 
85. 
LGD estimates must be grounded in historical recovery rates and, where 
applicable, must not be based solely on the estimated market value of collateral.  
86. 
To the extent that LGD estimates take into account the existence of collateral, an 
ADI must establish internal requirements for collateral management, operational 
procedures, legal certainty and risk management processes that are consistent 
with those detailed in Attachment G to APS 112 and Attachment E to this 
Prudential Standard. 
87. 
For LGD estimation purposes, an ADI must consider the extent of any 
dependence between the risk of the borrower and that of the collateral or collateral 
provider. Cases where there is a significant degree of dependence must be 
addressed in a conservative manner. Currency mismatches between the 
underlying obligation and the collateral must also be considered and treated 
conservatively in the ADI’s assessment of LGD. 
Additional requirements for corporate exposures 
88. 
Estimates of LGD for corporate exposures must be based on a minimum data 
observation period that should ideally cover at least one complete economic cycle 
but, in any case, must be no shorter than a period of seven years from at least one 
source. If the available observation period spans a longer period from any source 
and the data are relevant and material, this longer period must be used. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment D - 48 
Additional requirements for retail exposures 
89. 
The minimum data observation period for LGD estimates for retail exposures is 
five years from at least one data source. If the available observation period spans 
a longer period from any source and the data are relevant and material, this longer 
period must be used. The less data an ADI has, the more conservative it must be 
in its estimation of LGD. 
Additional requirements for defaulted exposures 
90. 
The LGD assigned to a defaulted exposure must reflect the possibility that an ADI 
may have to recognise additional UL during the recovery period. 
Risk quantification requirements specific to exposure at default 
estimation 
Requirements for revolving retail exposures 
91. 
An ADI must have procedures in place for the estimation of EAD for its off-
balance sheet exposures. Estimates of EAD must reflect the possibility of 
additional drawings by the borrower up to the time a default event is triggered. 
However, additional drawings after the time of default must not be reflected in 
EAD and must instead be included in LGD. Where estimates of EAD differ by 
facility type, the delineation of these facilities must be clear and unambiguous. 
92. 
An ADI must assign an estimate of EAD for each facility. EAD must be an 
estimate of the long-run default-weighted average EAD for similar facilities and 
borrowers over a sufficiently long period of time, with a margin of conservatism 
appropriate to the likely range of errors in the estimate. If a positive correlation 
can reasonably be expected between the default frequency and the magnitude of 
EAD, the EAD estimate must incorporate a larger margin of conservatism. 
93. 
For exposures where EAD estimates are volatile over the economic cycle, an ADI 
must use EAD estimates that are appropriate for an economic downturn if these 
are more conservative than the long-run default-weighted average. 
94. 
The criteria by which estimates of EAD are derived must be plausible, intuitive 
and represent what an ADI believes to be the material drivers of EAD. The criteria 
must be supported by credible internal analysis by the ADI. The ADI must be 
able to provide a breakdown of its EAD experience by the factors it sees as the 
drivers of EAD. The ADI must use all relevant and material information in its 
determination of EAD estimates. 
95. 
An ADI’s EAD estimates must give due consideration to its policies and 
procedures in respect of account monitoring and payment processing. The ADI 
must consider its ability and willingness to prevent further drawings in 
circumstances short of payment default, such as covenant violations or other 
technical default events. 
96. 
An ADI must have systems and procedures in place to monitor, on a daily basis, 
facility amounts, outstanding amounts against committed lines and changes in 
outstanding amounts for each borrower and borrower grade or pool. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment D - 49 
97. 
An ADI’s EAD estimates must be developed using a one-year fixed-horizon 
approach; that is, for each observation in the reference dataset, default outcomes 
must be linked to relevant borrower and facility characteristics one year prior to 
default. 
98. 
An ADI’s EAD estimates must be based on reference data that reflect the 
borrower, facility and ADI management practice characteristics of the exposures 
to which the estimates are applied. EAD estimates applied to particular exposures 
must not be based on data that co-mingle the effects of disparate characteristics 
or data from exposures that exhibit different characteristics. EAD estimates must 
be based on appropriately homogenous segments or an estimation approach that 
disentangles effectively the impact of the different characteristics exhibited 
within the relevant dataset.  
99. 
Where an ADI estimates CCFs directly, it must ensure that those estimates are 
quarantined effectively from the potential effects of the region of instability 
associated with facilities that are close to being fully drawn at the reference date. 
100. EAD reference data must not be capped at the principal amount outstanding or 
facility limits. Accrued interest, other due payments and limit excesses must be 
included in EAD reference data. 
101. The minimum data observation period for EAD estimation is five years from at 
least one data source. If the available observation period spans a longer period 
from any source and the data are relevant and material, this longer period must be 
used. The less data an ADI has, the more conservative it must be in its estimation 
of EAD. 
Risk quantification requirements specific to expected loss 
102. For each defaulted exposure, an ADI using the AIRB or retail IRB approach must 
construct its best estimate of EL for that exposure based on current economic 
circumstances and the facility’s status. The mechanical application of a long-run 
average or downturn LGD estimate is not acceptable for this purpose. Instances 
where the best estimate of EL on a defaulted exposure is less than the sum of 
provisions and partial write-offs on that exposure must be justified to APRA by 
the ADI. 
Validation of internal estimates 
103. An ADI must have a robust and documented system in place to validate the 
accuracy and consistency of rating systems, processes and the estimation of all 
relevant credit risk components. The ADI must ensure that the internal validation 
process enables it to assess the performance of its internal rating and credit risk 
estimation systems in a meaningful and consistent manner. 
104. Validation must be undertaken at least annually by personnel that are independent 
of those responsible for the development of an ADI’s rating systems and risk 
estimates. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment D - 50 
105. An ADI must regularly compare realised default rates with PD estimates for each 
borrower grade or pool and ensure that the realised default rates are within the 
expected range for each grade or pool. An ADI using its own LGD and EAD 
estimates must also complete such analysis for those estimates. Comparisons 
must make use of historical data over as long a time period as possible. The 
methods and data used in these comparisons must be clearly documented. This 
analysis and documentation must be updated at least annually.  
106. An ADI must also use other quantitative validation tools and comparisons with 
relevant external data sources. The analysis must be based on data that are 
appropriate to the portfolio, updated regularly and cover a relevant observation 
period. The ADI’s internal assessment of the performance of its rating systems 
must be based on long data histories covering a range of economic conditions 
and, ideally, one or more complete business cycles. 
107. An ADI must ensure that quantitative testing methods and other validation 
methods do not vary systematically with the economic cycle. Changes in methods 
and data (both data sources and periods covered) must be clearly and thoroughly 
documented. 
108. An ADI must have documented internal standards for situations where deviations 
from expectations in realised PD rates and, where applicable, LGD and EAD 
rates, become significant enough to call the validity of the estimates into question. 
These standards must take account of business cycles and similar systematic 
variability in default experience. Where realised values continue to be higher than 
expected values, the ADI must revise its estimates upward to reflect its actual 
default and loss experience.  
109. An ADI that uses supervisory, rather than internal, estimates of LGD and EAD 
must compare realised LGD and EAD rates to those set by APRA and use this 
information in its internal assessment of capital adequacy. The ADI must also 
complete such analysis in relation to EAD for arrangements that are excluded 
from the definition of a commitment under paragraph 3 of Attachment C to 
APS 112.
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment E - 51 
Attachment E - Requirements for recognition of 
collateral and credit risk mitigation 
Eligible collateral under the FIRB approach 
1. 
Where an ADI uses the FIRB approach, only the following may be recognised as 
eligible collateral: 
(a) 
financial collateral; 
(b) 
financial receivables; 
(c) 
commercial real estate and residential real estate; and 
(d) 
other physical collateral. 
Eligible financial collateral 
2. 
Eligible financial collateral is collateral that meets the minimum requirements 
detailed in Attachment G to APS 112.  
Eligible financial receivables 
3. 
Eligible financial receivables are exposures with an original maturity of one year 
or less, where repayment occurs through the commercial or financial flows related 
to the borrower’s underlying business operations. This includes: 
(a) 
self-liquidating debt arising from the sale of goods or services linked to a 
commercial transaction; and 
(b) 
general amounts owed by buyers, suppliers, renters, national and local 
government authorities or other non-affiliated parties that are not related to 
the sale of goods or services linked to a commercial transaction.  
Receivables from affiliates of the borrower (including subsidiaries and 
employees) and receivables associated with securitisations, sub-participations 
and credit derivatives must not be recognised as eligible financial receivables. 
4. 
An ADI may recognise financial receivables as eligible collateral where the 
following conditions are satisfied: 
(a) 
the ADI has a perfected first priority security interest in the collateral which 
is legally enforceable in all relevant jurisdictions. The ADI’s procedures 
must ensure that any legal conditions required for declaring the default of 
the customer are observed, and the ADI must be able to realise the collateral 
within a reasonable timeframe. In the event of the borrower’s financial 
distress or default, the ADI must have the legal authority to sell or assign 
the receivables to other parties without the consent of the receivables’ 
obligors; 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment E - 52 
(b) 
the ADI assesses the credit risk of the financial receivables taken as 
collateral. Where the ADI relies on the borrower to ascertain the credit risk 
of the receivables, it must review the borrower’s credit policy to determine 
its soundness and credibility; 
(c) 
the margin between the amount of the exposure and the value of the 
receivables must reflect the cost of collection, concentration within the 
receivables pool and concentration across the ADI’s total exposures; 
(d) 
the ADI maintains a continuous monitoring process over the financial 
receivables taken as collateral; 
(e) 
the ADI has concentration limits that it monitors; 
(f) 
the receivables should be diversified and must not be unduly correlated with 
the borrower. Where the correlation is high, the attendant risks must be 
taken into account in the setting of margins for the collateral pool as a 
whole; and  
(g) 
the ADI has a documented process and the requisite facilities for collecting 
cash remittances from the receivables’ obligor in the event of the 
borrower’s distress or bankruptcy.  
Eligible commercial or residential real estate 
5. 
An ADI may recognise commercial real estate and residential real estate collateral 
where the following requirements are met: 
(a) 
the risk of the borrower defaulting is not materially dependent upon the 
performance or cash flow of the underlying real estate asset or project but 
rather on the underlying capacity of the borrower to repay the credit 
obligation from other sources; 
(b) 
the value of the collateral is not materially dependent upon the performance 
of the borrower. This requirement is not intended to preclude situations 
where purely macro-economic factors affect both the value of the collateral 
and the performance of the borrower; 
(c) 
claims on the collateral are legally enforceable in all relevant jurisdictions 
and legal requirements for establishing the ADI’s claim are fulfilled. The 
collateral agreement and the legal process underpinning the transaction 
must allow the ADI to realise the value of the collateral within a reasonable 
timeframe; 
(d) 
the collateral is valued at no more than the current fair value under which it 
could be sold under contract between a willing seller and an independent 
buyer on the date of valuation; 
(e) 
the ADI monitors the value of the collateral on at least an annual basis. 
More frequent monitoring is required where the market is subject to 
significant changes in value; 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment E - 53 
(f) 
the ADI’s lending policies clearly document the types of commercial real 
estate and residential real estate collateral that are acceptable to the ADI. 
Exceptions to, or overrides of, the ADI’s policy must not be recognised as 
eligible commercial real estate and residential real estate collateral; 
(g) 
the ADI ensures that the real estate asset taken as collateral is adequately 
insured; 
(h) 
the ADI monitors and takes into account prior claims (e.g. taxation 
liabilities) on the real estate asset; and 
(i) 
the ADI monitors the risk of environmental liability arising in respect of the 
collateral. 
Junior liens over commercial real estate or residential real estate may be taken 
into account where there is no doubt that the claim for collateral is legally 
enforceable and constitutes effective credit risk mitigation. 
6. 
An ADI may recognise IPRE that falls under the specialised lending asset class 
as eligible collateral where: 
(a) 
markets are well-developed and long-established; 
(b) 
losses stemming from lower risk IPRE lending (defined as exposures up to 
the lower of 50 per cent of the market value or 60 per cent of the lending 
value) are less than 0.3 per cent of outstanding IPRE exposures in each of 
the past three years; 
(c) 
overall losses stemming from IPRE lending are less than 0.5 per cent of 
outstanding IPRE exposures in each of the past three years; 
(d) 
the ADI publicly discloses how it has satisfied the conditions in sub-
paragraphs (b) and (c); and 
(e) 
the conditions detailed in sub-paragraphs 5(c) to 5(i) of this Attachment are 
also satisfied. 
If the ADI is unable to satisfy these requirements, it must immediately cease to 
recognise IPRE as eligible collateral. 
Other eligible physical collateral 
7. 
An ADI may recognise other physical collateral where the following conditions 
are met: 
(a) 
the ADI is able to demonstrate the existence of liquid markets for the 
disposal of collateral in an expeditious and economically efficient manner. 
The ADI must assess that this condition is being met both periodically and 
when information indicates material changes in the market; 
(b) 
the ADI is able to demonstrate that there are well established, publicly 
available market prices for the collateral. For this purpose, publicly 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment E - 54 
available market prices may include valuations from independent third-
party appraisers that are available for purchase and reflect the current state 
of the market. The ADI must also be able to demonstrate that the amount it 
will receive when collateral is realised does not deviate significantly from 
these market prices;  
(c) 
the ADI must have a perfected security interest in the collateral, such that 
it has priority over all other lenders to the realised proceeds of the collateral. 
The security interest must be legally enforceable in all relevant 
jurisdictions, and the ADI must be able to realise the value of the collateral 
within a reasonable timeframe; 
(d) 
the facility agreement must include detailed descriptions of the collateral 
and the right to examine and revalue the collateral at the sole discretion of 
the ADI; 
(e) 
the collateral is valued at no more than the current fair value under which it 
could be sold under contract between a willing seller and an independent 
buyer on the date of valuation;  
(f) 
the ADI monitors the value of the collateral on at least an annual basis. 
More frequent monitoring is required where the market is subject to 
significant changes in value; 
(g) 
the ADI must have the right to physically inspect the collateral and have 
policies and procedures in place that set out the minimum frequency of 
inspection (physical or otherwise) for different types of collateral and the 
circumstances in which an inspection (physical or otherwise) of the 
collateral must be performed immediately; 
(h) 
the ADI must have clearly documented credit policies and procedures that 
detail the: 
(i) 
types of physical collateral accepted by the ADI, and policies and 
practices in respect of the appropriate amount of each type of 
collateral relative to the exposure amount; 
(ii) 
ADI’s ability to liquidate the collateral readily; and 
(iii) ADI’s ability to objectively establish a price or market value of the 
collateral, frequency with which the value can be readily obtained, 
and the volatility of the value of the collateral. The periodic 
revaluation process must pay particular attention to ‘fashion-
sensitive’ collateral to ensure that valuations are appropriately 
adjusted downward for fashion, or model-year, obsolescence as well 
as physical obsolescence or deterioration; 
(i) 
the ADI ensures that the collateral is adequately insured; and 
(j) 
the ADI monitors the risk of environmental liability arising in respect of the 
collateral. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment E - 55 
8. 
An ADI must have clearly documented policies and procedures for assessing each 
type of physical collateral against the conditions detailed in paragraph 7 of this 
Attachment. For this purpose, the ADI must consider: 
(a) 
in relation to sub-paragraph 7(a) of this Attachment, the attributes of the 
collateral such as the degree of customisation or standardisation, location 
of the market in which the collateral is expected to be exchanged, age, 
condition and reusability of the collateral, transaction costs (including the 
time to transaction), and the prevalence of brokers and dealers; and 
(b) 
where applicable, in relation to sub-paragraph 7(b) of this Attachment, the 
credibility of the appraiser and the reliability of their appraisals.  
9. 
An ADI must maintain a register of physical collateral deemed to be eligible 
collateral based on an assessment against the conditions detailed in paragraph 7 
of this Attachment. The register must be kept up-to-date and made available to 
APRA upon request. 
General security agreements 
10. 
Where an ADI’s exposure is secured by a general security agreement (or an 
equivalent form of floating charge) over both eligible collateral and other types 
of collateral, it may only recognise the security interest over eligible collateral. 
Recognition is conditional on the eligible collateral meeting the relevant 
operational requirements detailed in this Attachment. 
Recognition of leasing 
11. 
In addition to the minimum requirements for the eligible collateral type, an ADI 
must also satisfy the following requirements in relation to its lease exposures: 
(a) 
robust risk management practices with respect to the location of the leased 
asset, its use, age and planned obsolescence; 
(b) 
a robust legal framework establishing the ADI’s legal ownership of the 
leased asset and its ability to exercise its rights as owner in a timely manner; 
and 
(c) 
the difference between the rate of depreciation of the leased asset and the 
rate of amortisation of the lease payments must not be so large as to 
overstate the credit risk mitigation effect of the leased asset. 
Recognition of guarantees and credit derivatives 
12. 
In order to recognise the use of CRM techniques to reduce Regulatory Capital 
requirements, all documentation that supports the use of the CRM technique must 
be binding on all parties and legally enforceable in all relevant jurisdictions. An 
ADI must have undertaken sufficient legal review to be satisfied of the legal 
enforceability of the CRM technique, and must undertake periodic reviews to 
confirm its ongoing enforceability. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment E - 56 
13. 
All recognised guarantors and credit protection providers must be assigned a 
borrower rating at the outset and on an ongoing basis. An ADI must follow the 
minimum requirements for assigning borrower ratings as set out in Attachment D 
to this Prudential Standard. The ADI must undertake regular monitoring of the 
financial condition of the guarantor or credit protection provider, and its ability 
and willingness to honour its obligations. 
14. 
An ADI must have documented criteria for adjusting PD or LGD estimates to 
reflect the impact of guarantees and credit derivatives under the substitution 
approaches. These criteria must: 
(a) 
be consistent with the requirements for assigning exposures to borrower or 
facility grades or pools as set out in paragraphs 19 to 23 of Attachment D 
to this Prudential Standard; 
(b) 
be plausible and intuitive, and address the guarantor or credit protection 
provider’s ability and willingness to perform under the guarantee or credit 
derivative; 
(c) 
address the likely timing of any payments and the degree to which the 
guarantor or credit protection provider’s ability to perform under the 
guarantee or credit derivative is correlated with the borrower’s ability to 
repay; and 
(d) 
consider the extent to which residual risks remain. 
15. 
The criteria used for adjusting PD or LGD estimates for exposures covered by 
credit derivatives must also: 
(a) 
require that the asset on which the protection is based (the reference asset) 
not be different from the underlying asset unless the conditions detailed in 
paragraphs 10 and 11 of Attachment J to APS 112 are met; and 
(b) 
address the payout structure of the credit derivative and conservatively 
assess the impact this has on the level and timing of recoveries. 
Where a credit derivative does not cover the restructuring of the underlying asset, 
partial recognition is allowed as detailed in paragraph 9 of Attachment J to 
APS 112. 
16. 
In adjusting PD or LGD estimates to reflect the impact of guarantees and credit 
derivatives, an ADI must take all relevant, material information into account. 
17. 
An ADI must retain all relevant information on the assignment of an exposure to 
a borrower or facility grade or pool, and the estimation of PD and LGD, 
independently of the assessed effect of the guarantee or credit derivative. 
FIRB approach 
18. 
For exposures subject to the FIRB approach, an ADI must meet the requirements 
detailed in Attachment I to APS 112 to recognise a guarantee as eligible CRM. In 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment E - 57 
addition to the eligible guarantors detailed in APS 112, the ADI may also 
recognise borrowers that are internally rated as eligible guarantors. 
19. 
For exposures subject to the FIRB approach, an ADI must meet the requirements 
detailed in Attachment J to APS 112 to recognise credit derivatives as eligible 
CRM. 
AIRB or retail IRB approach 
20. 
For exposures subject to the AIRB or retail IRB approach, an ADI is not limited 
in its recognition of eligible guarantors or credit protection providers provided it 
has clearly documented criteria for the types of guarantors or credit protection 
providers it will recognise for Regulatory Capital purposes. Additionally, the 
guarantee or credit derivative must be: 
(a) 
evidenced in writing; 
(b) 
non-cancellable on the part of the guarantor or credit protection provider;  
(c) 
in force until the obligation is satisfied in full (to the extent of the amount 
and tenor of the guarantee or credit derivative); and 
(d) 
unconditional, such that it does not include any clauses that are outside the 
direct control of the ADI, or that could prevent the guarantor or credit 
protection provider from being obliged to pay out in a timely manner in the 
event that the borrower fails to make the payment(s) due. However, the ADI 
may recognise guarantees or credit derivatives that only cover the loss 
remaining after the ADI has first pursued the borrower for payment and has 
completed the workout process.  
21. 
For exposures subject to the AIRB or retail IRB approach, an ADI may recognise 
the risk mitigating effects of first-to-default credit derivatives but must not 
recognise second-to-default or nth-to-default credit derivatives.
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment F - 58 
Attachment F - Risk-weighted assets for purchased 
receivables 
1. 
An ADI must treat purchased receivables as either: 
(a) 
retail receivables, where the underlying receivables meet the definition of 
retail exposures; or 
(b) 
corporate receivables, where the underlying receivables meet the definition 
of corporate exposures. 
Risk-weighted assets for default risk 
2. 
When estimating PD and LGD for purchased retail receivables or purchased 
corporate receivables, an ADI may utilise internal or external reference data. The 
estimates must be determined on a stand-alone basis without regard to any 
assumption of recourse of guarantees from the seller or other parties. 
Default risk for purchased retail receivables 
3. 
An ADI must calculate the capital requirement for default risk for purchased retail 
receivables using the relevant retail risk-weight function in accordance with 
Attachment A to this Prudential Standard.  
4. 
For hybrid pools containing receivables belonging to more than one retail sub-
asset class, if a purchasing ADI cannot separate the exposures by the type of retail 
sub-asset class, the risk-weight function that produces the highest capital 
requirement at each PD level must be applied.  
Default risk for purchased corporate receivables 
5. 
An ADI must calculate the capital requirement for default risk for purchased 
corporate receivables using the corporate risk-weight function as set out in 
Attachment A to this Prudential Standard. The ADI must assess the default risk 
of individual corporate borrowers within each pool of purchased corporate 
receivables as detailed in Attachment D to this Prudential Standard. 
Top-down approach 
6. 
Where an ADI is unable to calculate the capital requirement for default risk for 
purchased corporate receivables as detailed in paragraph 5 of this Attachment, the 
ADI may use a top-down approach for purchased corporate receivables. The use 
of a top-down approach is subject to prior approval from APRA.  
7. 
To be eligible for the top-down approach, purchased corporate receivables must 
satisfy the following conditions: 
(a) 
the receivables are purchased from unrelated, third-party sellers (i.e. an ADI 
has not been directly or indirectly involved in originating the receivables); 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment F - 59 
(b) 
the receivables have been generated on an arms-length basis between the 
seller and the obligors. Inter-company accounts receivable and receivables 
subject to contra-accounts between firms that buy and sell amongst each 
other are ineligible;12  
(c) 
the purchasing ADI has a claim on all proceeds from the pool of receivables 
or a pro rata interest in the proceeds commensurate with its exposure to the 
pool;13 and 
(d) 
the maximum size of an individual exposure in the pool of receivables is 
less than $100,000. 
8. 
The existence of full or partial recourse to the seller does not automatically 
disqualify an ADI from adopting a top-down approach provided the cash flows 
from the purchased corporate receivables are the primary source of ultimate 
repayment.  
9. 
Under the top-down approach, an ADI must segment pools of purchased 
corporate receivables into homogenous buckets. The risk weight for default risk 
must be determined using the risk-weight function for corporate exposures as 
detailed in Attachment A to this Prudential Standard.14  
10. 
An ADI must estimate PD and LGD for each of the homogenous segmented pools 
of purchased corporate receivables in accordance with its IRB approval for 
corporate exposures. The ADI must also calculate: 
(a) 
EAD as the amount outstanding for each segmented pool less the capital 
requirement for dilution risk for each segmented pool prior to CRM or, for 
a revolving purchase facility, the sum of the current amount of receivables 
purchased plus 40 per cent of any undrawn purchase commitments less the 
capital requirement for dilution risk prior to CRM; and 
(b) 
M for drawn amounts as equal to the segmented pools’ exposure-weighted 
average maturity. This same value of M must also be used for any undrawn 
amounts to which the ADI is committed under a purchased receivables 
facility, provided that the facility contains covenants, early amortisation 
triggers or other features that protect the purchasing ADI against a 
significant deterioration in the quality of the future receivables it is required 
to purchase over the facility’s term. In the absence of such protection, the 
M for undrawn amounts must be calculated as the sum of: 
                                                 
12  
Contra-accounts involve a customer buying from and selling to the same firm. 
13  
Claims on tranches of the proceeds (e.g. first or second loss positions) are subject to the capital 
requirements set out in APS 120. 
14  
The firm-size adjustment, as set out in paragraph 6 of Attachment A to this Prudential Standard, 
is the weighted average firm-size for individual exposures in the pool of purchased corporate 
receivables. If an ADI does not have the information to calculate the average firm-size of the pool, 
the firm-size adjustment does not apply. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment F - 60 
(i) 
the longest-dated potential receivable under the purchase agreement; 
and  
(ii) 
the remaining maturity of the purchase facility.  
Risk-weighted assets for dilution risk 
11. 
Unless a purchasing ADI can demonstrate to APRA that dilution risk is 
immaterial, it must hold capital for dilution risk for purchased corporate and retail 
receivables. 
12. 
An ADI must calculate the capital requirement for dilution risk for purchased 
receivables, at either the level of the segmented pool or the individual receivables 
making up a pool, using the corporate risk-weight function. PD must be set equal 
to the estimate of the expected long-run average annual loss rate (expressed as a 
percentage of the exposure amount, i.e. the total EAD owed to the ADI by all 
obligors in the relevant pool of receivables) and LGD must be set to 100 per cent.  
13. 
An ADI may utilise internal or external reference data to estimate an expected 
long-run average annual loss rate for dilution risk. These estimates must be 
calculated on a stand-alone basis without regard to any assumption of recourse or 
guarantees from the seller or other parties.  
14. 
An appropriate maturity must be used when determining the capital requirement 
for dilution risk. If an ADI can demonstrate to APRA that dilution risk is 
appropriately monitored and managed so as to be resolved within one year of 
acquisition of the purchased receivables, APRA may grant an approval allowing 
the ADI to base its calculations on a one-year maturity assumption. 
Treatment of purchase price discount for receivables 
15. 
Where a portion of any purchase price discount is refundable to the seller, the 
refundable amount must be treated as first-loss protection under APS 120. Non-
refundable purchase price discounts for purchased receivables do not affect the 
Regulatory Capital calculation. 
16. 
When collateral or partial guarantees obtained on purchased receivables provide 
first-loss protection covering default losses, dilution losses, or both, they must be 
recognised as first-loss protection under APS 120.  
Recognition of credit risk mitigation 
17. 
An ADI may recognise a guarantee for purchased receivables where the guarantee 
meets the requirements in Attachment E to this Prudential Standard. If the 
guarantee covers: 
(a) 
a pool’s default risk and dilution risk, the ADI may substitute the risk 
weight for an exposure to the guarantor in place of the relevant pool’s total 
risk weight for default and dilution risks; 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment F - 61 
(b) 
only one of either default risk or dilution risk, the ADI may substitute the 
risk weight for an exposure to the guarantor in place of the relevant pool’s 
risk weight for the corresponding risk. The capital requirement for the non-
guaranteed component must then be added; and 
(c) 
only a portion of the default or dilution risk of a relevant pool, the 
uncovered portion must be treated using the rules for proportional or 
tranched cover detailed in APS 112.  
Requirements specific to estimating probability of default, 
loss given default and expected loss for qualifying purchased 
receivables 
18. 
The minimum requirements for risk quantification detailed in paragraphs 19 to 
21 of this Attachment must be satisfied in order to apply the top-down approach 
for: 
(a) 
default risk (in relation to purchased corporate receivables); or 
(b) 
dilution risk (in relation to purchased corporate or retail receivables). 
19. 
An ADI must group purchased receivables into sufficiently homogeneous 
segmented pools so that accurate and consistent estimates of PD and LGD for 
default risk and expected long-run average loss rates for dilution risk can be 
determined. 
20. 
The risk-bucketing process applied by an ADI must reflect the seller’s 
underwriting practices and heterogeneity of its customers. Methods and data for 
estimating PD, LGD and expected long-run average loss rates must comply with 
the risk quantification standards for retail exposures detailed in Attachment D to 
this Prudential Standard.  
21. 
To qualify for the top-down approach for default risk, the pools of receivables 
and overall lending relationship must be closely monitored and controlled by an 
ADI.
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment G - 62 
Attachment G - Supervisory slotting criteria 
Table 9 
Slotting criteria for project finance exposures 
 
Strong 
Good 
Satisfactory 
Weak 
Financial Strength 
Market Conditions 
There are few competing 
suppliers or there is a 
substantial and durable 
advantage in location, cost 
or technology. Demand is 
strong and growing. 
There are few competing 
suppliers or there is a better 
than average location, cost 
or technology but this 
situation may not last. 
Demand is strong and stable. 
The project has no 
advantage in location, cost 
or technology. Demand is 
adequate and stable. 
The project has worse than 
average location, cost or 
technology. Demand is weak 
and declining. 
Financial ratios (e.g. debt 
service coverage ratio 
(DSCR), loan life coverage 
ratio (LLCR), project life 
coverage ratio (PLCR) and 
debt-to-equity ratio) 
The project has strong 
financial ratios considering 
the level of project risk and 
very robust economic 
assumptions. 
The project has strong to 
acceptable financial ratios 
considering the level of 
project risk and robust 
project economic 
assumptions. 
The project has standard 
financial ratios considering 
the level of project risk. 
The project has aggressive 
financial ratios considering 
the level of project risk. 
Stress analysis 
The project can meet its 
financial obligations under 
sustained severely stressed 
economic or sectoral 
conditions. 
The project can meet its 
financial obligations under 
stressed economic or 
sectoral conditions. The 
project is only likely to 
default under severe 
economic conditions. 
The project is vulnerable to 
stresses that are not 
uncommon through an 
economic cycle and may 
default in a normal 
downturn. 
The project is likely to 
default unless conditions 
improve soon. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment G - 63 
 
Strong 
Good 
Satisfactory 
Weak 
Financial structure 
 
 
 
 
Duration of the exposure 
compared to the duration of 
the project 
The useful life of the project 
significantly exceeds the 
tenor of the loan. 
The useful life of the project 
exceeds the tenor of the 
loan. 
The useful life of the project 
exceeds the tenor of the 
loan. 
The useful life of the project 
may not exceed the tenor of 
the loan. 
Amortisation schedule 
Amortising debt. 
Amortising debt. 
Amortising debt repayments 
with limited balloon 
payment. 
Bullet payment or 
amortising debt with high 
balloon repayment. 
Political and legal environment 
Political risk, including 
transfer risk, considering 
project type and mitigants 
The project has very low 
exposure; there are strong 
mitigation instruments, if 
needed. 
The project has low 
exposure; there are 
satisfactory mitigation 
instruments, if needed. 
The project has moderate 
exposure; there are fair 
mitigation instruments. 
The project has high 
exposure; the mitigation 
instruments are weak or 
there are none. 
Force majeure risk (war, 
civil unrest, etc) 
Low exposure. 
Acceptable exposure. 
Standard protection. 
There are significant risks 
which are not fully 
mitigated. 
Government support and 
project’s importance for the 
country over the long term 
The project is of strategic 
importance for the country 
(preferably export-oriented). 
It has strong support from 
the government. 
The project is considered 
important for the country. It 
has a good level of support 
from the government. 
The project may not be 
strategic but brings 
unquestionable benefits for 
the country. Government 
support may not be explicit. 
The project is not key to the 
country. The support from 
the government, if any, is 
weak. 
Stability of legal and 
regulatory environment (risk 
of change in law) 
The regulatory environment 
is favourable and stable over 
the long term. 
The regulatory environment 
is favourable and stable over 
the medium term. 
Regulatory changes can be 
predicted with a fair level of 
certainty. 
Current or future regulatory 
issues may affect the project. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment G - 64 
 
Strong 
Good 
Satisfactory 
Weak 
Acquisition of all necessary 
supports and approvals for 
relief from local content 
laws 
Strong.  
Satisfactory. 
Fair. 
Weak.  
Enforceability of contracts, 
collateral and security 
Contracts, collateral and 
security are enforceable. 
Contracts, collateral and 
security are enforceable. 
Contracts, collateral and 
security are considered 
enforceable even if certain 
non-key issues exist. 
There are unresolved key 
issues in respect of actual 
enforcement of contracts, 
collateral and security. 
Transaction characteristics 
Design and technology risk 
The project has fully proven 
technology and design. 
The project has fully proven 
technology and design. 
The project has proven 
technology and design; start-
up issues are mitigated by a 
strong completion package. 
The project has unproven 
technology and design; 
technology issues exist 
and/or complex design. 
Construction risk 
 
 
 
 
Permitting and siting 
All permits have been 
obtained. 
Some permits are still 
outstanding but their receipt 
is considered very likely. 
Some permits are still 
outstanding but the 
permitting process is well 
defined and they are 
considered routine. 
Key permits still need to be 
obtained and are not 
considered routine. 
Significant conditions may 
be attached. 
Type of construction 
contract 
Fixed-price date-certain 
turnkey construction 
engineering and 
procurement contract (EPC). 
Fixed-price date-certain 
turnkey construction EPC. 
Fixed-price date-certain 
turnkey construction 
contract with one or several 
contractors. 
No or partial fixed-price 
turnkey contract and/or 
interfacing issues with 
multiple contractors. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment G - 65 
 
Strong 
Good 
Satisfactory 
Weak 
Completion guarantees 
The liquidated damages are 
substantial and are supported 
by financial substance and/or 
strong completion guarantee 
from sponsors with excellent 
financial standing. 
The liquidated damages are 
significant and are supported 
by financial substance and/or 
completion guarantee from 
sponsors with good financial 
standing. 
The liquidated damages are 
adequate and are supported 
by financial substance and/or 
completion guarantee from 
sponsors with good financial 
standing. 
The liquidated damages are 
inadequate or not supported 
by financial substance, or 
weak completion guarantees. 
Track record and financial 
strength of contractor in 
constructing similar projects 
Strong.  
Satisfactory. 
Fair. 
Weak.  
Operating risk 
 
 
 
 
Scope and nature of 
operations and maintenance 
(O&M) contracts 
There is a strong long-term 
O&M contract, preferably 
with contractual 
performance incentives 
and/or O&M reserve 
accounts. 
There is a long-term O&M 
contract and/or O&M 
reserve accounts. 
There is a limited O&M 
contract or O&M reserve 
account. 
There is no O&M contract. 
There is a risk of high 
operational cost overruns 
beyond mitigants. 
Operator’s expertise, track 
record and financial 
strength 
Very strong, or committed 
technical assistance of the 
sponsors. 
Strong. 
Acceptable.  
Limited/weak, or local 
operator dependent on local 
authorities. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment G - 66 
 
Strong 
Good 
Satisfactory 
Weak 
Off-take risk 
 
 
 
 
If there is a take-or-pay or 
fixed-price off-take contract 
The off-taker has excellent 
creditworthiness. There are 
strong termination clauses. 
The tenor of the contract 
comfortably exceeds the 
maturity of the debt. 
The off-taker has good 
creditworthiness. There are 
strong termination clauses. 
The tenor of the contract 
exceeds the maturity of the 
debt. 
The off-taker’s financial 
standing is acceptable. There 
are normal termination 
clauses. The tenor of the 
contract generally matches 
the maturity of the debt. 
The off-taker is considered 
weak and there are weak 
termination clauses. The 
tenor of the contract does not 
exceed the maturity of the 
debt. 
If there is no take-or-pay or 
fixed-price off-take contract 
The project produces 
essential services or a 
commodity sold widely on a 
world market. Output can 
readily be absorbed at 
projected prices even at 
lower than historic market 
growth rates. 
The project produces 
essential services or a 
commodity sold widely on a 
regional market that will 
absorb it at projected prices 
at historical growth rates. 
The commodity is sold on a 
limited market that may 
absorb it only at lower than 
projected prices. 
The project output is 
demanded by only one or a 
few buyers or is not 
generally sold on an 
organised market. 
Supply risk 
 
 
 
 
Price, volume and 
transportation risk of feed-
stocks; supplier’s track 
record and financial 
strength 
There is a long-term supply 
contract with a supplier of 
excellent financial standing. 
There is a long-term supply 
contract with a supplier of 
good financial standing. 
There is a long-term supply 
contract with a supplier of 
good financial standing – a 
degree of price risk may 
remain. 
There is a short-term supply 
contract, or long-term 
contract with a financially 
weak supplier –price risk 
definitely remains. 
Reserve risks (e.g. natural 
resource development) 
Reserves are independently 
audited, proven and 
developed and are well in 
excess of requirements over 
lifetime of the project. 
Reserves are independently 
audited, proven and 
developed and are in excess 
of requirements over lifetime 
of the project. 
Reserves are proven and can 
supply the project 
adequately through the 
maturity of the debt. 
The project relies to some 
extent on potential and 
undeveloped reserves. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment G - 67 
 
Strong 
Good 
Satisfactory 
Weak 
Strength of sponsor 
Sponsor’s track record, 
financial strength and 
country/sector experience 
The sponsor is strong with 
an excellent track record and 
high financial standing. 
The sponsor is good with a 
satisfactory track record and 
good financial standing. 
The sponsor is adequate with 
an adequate track record and 
good financial standing. 
The sponsor is weak with a 
questionable/no track record 
and/or financial weaknesses. 
Sponsor support, as 
evidenced by equity, 
ownership clause and 
incentive to inject additional 
cash if necessary 
Strong. The project is highly 
strategic for the sponsor 
(core business – long-term 
strategy). 
Good. The project is 
strategic for the sponsor 
(core business – long-term 
strategy). 
Acceptable. The project is 
considered important for the 
sponsor (core business). 
Limited. The project is not 
key to the sponsor’s long-
term strategy or core 
business. 
Security package 
Assignment of contracts and 
accounts 
Fully comprehensive. 
Comprehensive. 
Acceptable. 
Weak.  
Pledge of assets, taking into 
account quality, value and 
liquidity of assets 
First perfected security 
interest in all project assets, 
contracts, permits and 
accounts necessary to run 
the project. 
Perfected security interest in 
all project assets, contracts, 
permits and accounts 
necessary to run the project. 
Acceptable security interest 
in all project assets, 
contracts, permits and 
accounts necessary to run 
the project. 
Little security or collateral 
for lenders; weak negative 
pledge clause. 
Lender’s control over cash 
flow (e.g. cash sweeps, 
independent escrow 
accounts) 
Strong.  
Satisfactory. 
Fair. 
Weak.  
Strength of the covenant 
package (mandatory 
prepayments, payment 
deferrals, payment cascade, 
dividend restrictions, etc) 
The covenant package is 
strong for this type of 
project. The project may 
issue no additional debt. 
The covenant package is 
satisfactory for this type of 
project. The project may 
issue extremely limited 
additional debt. 
The covenant package is fair 
for this type of project. The 
project may issue limited 
additional debt. 
The covenant package is 
insufficient for this type of 
project. The project may 
issue unlimited additional 
debt. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment G - 68 
 
Strong 
Good 
Satisfactory 
Weak 
Reserve funds (debt service, 
O&M, renewal and 
replacement, unforeseen 
events, etc) 
There is a longer than 
average coverage period, all 
reserve funds are fully 
funded in cash or letters of 
credit from highly rated 
banks. 
There is an average coverage 
period and all reserve funds 
fully funded. 
There is an average coverage 
period and all reserve funds 
fully funded. 
The coverage period is 
shorter than average and 
reserve funds are funded 
from operating cash flows. 
 
 
 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment G - 69 
Table 10 Slotting criteria for income-producing real estate exposures  
 
Strong 
Good 
Satisfactory 
Weak 
Financial Strength 
Market conditions 
The supply and demand for 
the project’s type and 
location are currently in 
equilibrium. The number of 
competitive properties 
coming to market is equal or 
lower than forecasted 
demand. 
The supply and demand for 
the project’s type and 
location are currently in 
equilibrium. The number of 
competitive properties 
coming to market is roughly 
equal to forecasted demand. 
Market conditions are 
roughly in equilibrium. 
Competitive properties are 
coming on the market and 
others are in the planning 
stages. The project’s design 
and capabilities may not be 
state of the art compared to 
new projects. 
Market conditions are weak. 
It is uncertain when 
conditions will improve and 
return to equilibrium. The 
project is losing tenants at 
lease expiration. New lease 
terms are less favourable 
compared to those expiring. 
Financial ratios and advance 
rate 
The property’s DSCR is 
considered strong (DSCR is 
not relevant for the 
construction phase) and its 
loan-to-valuation ratio 
(LVR) is considered low 
given its property type. 
Where a secondary market 
exists, the transaction is 
underwritten to market 
standards. 
The DSCR (not relevant for 
development real estate) and 
LVR are satisfactory. Where 
a secondary market exists, 
the transaction is 
underwritten to market 
standards. 
The property’s DSCR has 
deteriorated and its value has 
fallen, increasing its LVR. 
The property’s DSCR has 
deteriorated significantly 
and its LVR is well above 
underwriting standards for 
new loans. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment G - 70 
 
Strong 
Good 
Satisfactory 
Weak 
Stress analysis 
The property’s resources, 
contingencies and liability 
structure allow it to meet its 
financial obligations during 
a period of severe financial 
stress (e.g. increase in 
interest rates, downturn in 
economic growth). 
The property can meet its 
financial obligations under a 
sustained period of financial 
stress (e.g. increase in 
interest rates, downturn in 
economic growth). The 
property is likely to default 
only under severe economic 
conditions. 
During an economic 
downturn, the property 
would suffer a decline in 
revenue that would limit its 
ability to fund capital 
expenditures and 
significantly increase the 
risk of default. 
The property’s financial 
condition is strained and is 
likely to default unless 
conditions improve in the 
near term. 
Cash-flow predictability 
 
 
 
 
For complete and stabilised 
property 
The property’s leases are 
long-term with creditworthy 
tenants and their maturity 
dates are scattered. The 
property has a track record 
of tenant retention upon 
lease expiration. Its vacancy 
rate is low. Expenses 
(maintenance, insurance, 
security and property taxes) 
are predictable. 
Most of the property’s leases 
are long-term, with tenants 
that range in 
creditworthiness. The 
property experiences a 
normal level of tenant 
turnover upon lease 
expiration. Its vacancy rate 
is low. Expenses are 
predictable. 
Most of the property’s leases 
are medium-term rather than 
long-term with tenants that 
range in creditworthiness. 
The property experiences a 
moderate level of tenant 
turnover upon lease 
expiration. Its vacancy rate 
is moderate. Expenses are 
relatively predictable but 
vary in relation to revenue. 
The property’s leases are of 
various terms with tenants 
that range in 
creditworthiness. The 
property experiences a very 
high level of tenant turnover 
upon lease expiration. Its 
vacancy rate is high. 
Significant expenses are 
incurred preparing space for 
new tenants. 
For complete but not 
stabilised property 
Leasing activity meets or 
exceeds projections. The 
project should achieve 
stabilisation in the near 
future. 
Leasing activity meets or 
exceeds projections. The 
project should achieve 
stabilisation in the near 
future. 
Most leasing activity is 
within projections however, 
stabilisation will not occur 
for some time. 
Market rents do not meet 
expectations. Despite 
achieving target occupancy 
rate, cash flow coverage is 
tight due to disappointing 
revenue. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment G - 71 
 
Strong 
Good 
Satisfactory 
Weak 
For construction phase 
The property is entirely pre-
leased through the tenor of 
the loan or pre-sold to an 
investment grade tenant or 
buyer or the ADI has a 
binding commitment for 
take-out financing from an 
investment grade lender. 
The property is entirely pre-
leased or pre-sold to a 
creditworthy tenant or buyer 
or the ADI has a binding 
commitment for permanent 
financing from a 
creditworthy lender. 
Leasing activity is within 
projections but the building 
may not be pre-leased and 
take-out financing may not 
exist. The ADI may be the 
permanent lender. 
The property is deteriorating 
due to cost overruns, market 
deterioration, tenant 
cancellations or other 
factors. There may be a 
dispute with the party 
providing the permanent 
financing. 
Asset characteristics 
Location 
The property is located in a 
highly desirable location that 
is convenient to services that 
tenants desire. 
The property is located in a 
desirable location that is 
convenient to services that 
tenants desire. 
The property location lacks a 
competitive advantage. 
The property’s location, 
configuration, design and 
maintenance have 
contributed to the property’s 
difficulties. 
Design and condition 
The property is favoured due 
to its design, configuration 
and maintenance and is 
highly competitive with new 
properties. 
The property is appropriate 
in terms of its design, 
configuration and 
maintenance. The property’s 
design and capabilities are 
competitive with new 
properties. 
The property is adequate in 
terms of its configuration, 
design and maintenance. 
Weaknesses exist in the 
property’s configuration, 
design or maintenance. 
Property is under 
construction 
The construction budget is 
conservative and technical 
hazards are limited. 
Contractors are highly 
qualified. 
The construction budget is 
conservative and technical 
hazards are limited. 
Contractors are highly 
qualified. 
The construction budget is 
adequate and contractors are 
ordinarily qualified. 
The project is over budget or 
unrealistic given its technical 
hazards. Contractors may be 
under qualified. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment G - 72 
 
Strong 
Good 
Satisfactory 
Weak 
Strength of sponsor/developer 
Financial capacity and 
willingness to support the 
property 
The sponsor/developer made 
a substantial cash 
contribution to the 
construction or purchase of 
the property. The 
sponsor/developer has 
substantial resources and 
limited direct and contingent 
liabilities. The 
sponsor/developer’s 
properties are diversified 
geographically and by 
property type. 
The sponsor/developer made 
a material cash contribution 
to the construction or 
purchase of the property. 
The sponsor/developer’s 
financial condition allows it 
to support the property in the 
event of a cash flow 
shortfall. The 
sponsor/developer’s 
properties are located in 
several geographic regions. 
The sponsor/developer’s 
contribution may be 
immaterial or non-cash. The 
sponsor/developer is average 
to below average in financial 
resources. 
The sponsor/developer lacks 
capacity or willingness to 
support the property. 
Reputation and track record 
with similar properties 
Management are 
experienced and the 
sponsor’s quality is high. 
Strong reputation, lengthy 
and successful record with 
similar properties. 
Appropriate management 
and sponsor’s quality. The 
sponsor or management has 
a successful record with 
similar properties. 
Moderate management and 
sponsor’s quality. The 
management or sponsor 
track record does not raise 
serious concerns. 
Ineffective management and 
sub-standard sponsor’s 
quality. The management 
and sponsor difficulties have 
contributed to difficulties in 
managing properties in the 
past. 
Relationships with relevant 
real estate agents 
Strong relationships with 
leading agents such as 
leasing agents. 
Proven relationships with 
leading agents such as 
leasing agents. 
Adequate relationships with 
leasing agents and other 
parties providing important 
real estate services. 
Poor relationships with 
leasing agents and/or other 
parties providing important 
real estate services. 
Security package 
Nature of lien 
Perfected first lien. 
Perfected first lien. 
Perfected first lien. 
Ability of lender to foreclose 
is constrained. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment G - 73 
 
Strong 
Good 
Satisfactory 
Weak 
Assignment of rents (for 
projects leased to long-term 
tenants) 
The lender has obtained an 
assignment. They maintain 
current tenant information 
that would facilitate 
providing notice to remit 
rents directly to the lender, 
such as a current rent roll 
and copies of the project’s 
leases. 
The lender has obtained an 
assignment. They maintain 
current tenant information 
that would facilitate 
providing notice to the 
tenants to remit rents 
directly to the lender, such 
as current rent roll and 
copies of the project’s 
leases. 
The lender has obtained an 
assignment. They maintain 
current tenant information 
that would facilitate 
providing notice to the 
tenants to remit rents 
directly to the lender, such 
as current rent roll and 
copies of the project’s 
leases. 
The lender has not obtained 
an assignment of the leases 
or has not maintained the 
information necessary to 
readily provide notice to the 
building’s tenants. 
Quality of the insurance 
coverage 
Appropriate. 
Appropriate. 
Appropriate. 
Sub-standard. 
 
 
 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment G - 74 
Table 11 Slotting criteria for object finance exposures 
 
Strong 
Good 
Satisfactory 
Weak 
Financial Strength 
Market Conditions 
Demand is strong and 
growing. There are strong 
entry barriers and low 
sensitivity to changes in 
technology and economic 
outlook. 
Demand is strong and stable. 
There are some entry 
barriers and some sensitivity 
to changes in technology and 
economic outlook. 
Demand is adequate and the 
entry barriers are limited and 
stable. There is significant 
sensitivity to changes in 
technology and economic 
outlook. 
Demand is weak and 
declining, vulnerable to 
changes in technology and 
economic outlook and a 
highly uncertain 
environment. 
Financial ratios (debt service 
coverage ratio and LVR) 
The financial ratios are 
strong considering the type 
of asset. Very robust 
economic assumptions. 
The financial ratios are 
strong/acceptable 
considering the type of asset. 
Robust project economic 
assumptions. 
The financial ratios are 
standard for the asset type. 
The financial ratios are 
aggressive considering the 
type of asset. 
Stress analysis 
Long-term revenues are 
stable and capable of 
withstanding severely 
stressed conditions through 
an economic cycle. 
Short-term revenues are 
satisfactory. The loan can 
withstand some financial 
adversity. Default is only 
likely under severe 
economic conditions. 
Short-term revenues are 
uncertain. Cash flows are 
vulnerable to stresses that 
are not uncommon through 
an economic cycle. The loan 
may default in a normal 
downturn. 
Revenues are subject to 
strong uncertainties. Even in 
normal economic conditions 
the asset may default, unless 
conditions improve. 
Market liquidity 
The market is structured on a 
worldwide basis. Assets are 
highly liquid. 
The market is worldwide or 
regional. Assets are 
relatively liquid. 
The market is regional with 
limited prospects in the short 
term, implying lower 
liquidity. 
The market is local and/or 
has poor visibility. There is 
low or no liquidity, 
particularly in niche 
markets. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment G - 75 
 
Strong 
Good 
Satisfactory 
Weak 
Political and legal environment 
Political risk, including 
transfer risk 
Very low. There are strong 
mitigation instruments, if 
needed. 
Low. There are satisfactory 
mitigation instruments, if 
needed. 
Moderate. There are fair 
mitigation instruments. 
High. The mitigation 
instruments, if any, are 
weak. 
Legal and regulatory risks 
The jurisdiction is 
favourable to repossession 
and enforcement of 
contracts. 
The jurisdiction is 
favourable to repossession 
and enforcement of 
contracts. 
The jurisdiction is generally 
favourable to repossession 
and enforcement of 
contracts, even if 
repossession might be long 
and/or difficult. 
The legal and regulatory 
environment is poor and/or 
unstable. The jurisdiction 
may make repossession and 
enforcement of contracts 
lengthy or impossible. 
Transaction characteristics 
Financing term compared to 
the economic life of the asset 
Full payout profile/minimum 
balloon. No grace period. 
Balloon more significant, 
but still at satisfactory levels. 
Important balloon with 
potential grace periods. 
Repayment in fine or high 
balloon. 
Operating risk 
Permits/licensing 
All permits have been 
obtained; the asset meets 
current and foreseeable 
safety regulations. 
All permits have been 
obtained or are in the 
process of being obtained; 
the asset meets current and 
foreseeable safety 
regulations. 
Most permits have been 
obtained or are in the 
process of being obtained; 
outstanding ones are 
considered routine; the asset 
meets current safety 
regulations. 
There are problems in 
obtaining all required 
permits; part of the planned 
configuration and/or planned 
operations might need to be 
revised. 
Scope and nature of O&M 
contracts  
There is a strong long-term 
O&M contract, preferably 
with contractual 
performance incentives 
and/or O&M reserve 
accounts (if needed). 
There is a long-term O&M 
contract and/or O&M 
reserve accounts (if needed). 
There is a limited O&M 
contract or O&M reserve 
account (if needed). 
There is no O&M contract 
and a risk of high 
operational cost overruns 
beyond mitigants. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment G - 76 
 
Strong 
Good 
Satisfactory 
Weak 
Operator’s financial 
strength, track record in 
managing the asset type and 
capability to re-market asset 
when it comes off-lease 
Excellent track record and 
strong re-marketing 
capability. 
Satisfactory track record and 
re-marketing capability. 
Weak or short track record 
and uncertain re-marketing 
capability. 
No or unknown track record 
and inability to re-market the 
asset. 
Asset characteristics 
Configuration, size, design 
and maintenance (e.g. age, 
size for a plane) compared to 
other assets on the same 
market 
There is a strong advantage 
in design and maintenance. 
Configuration is standard 
such that the object meets a 
liquid market. 
The design and maintenance 
is above average. Standard 
configuration, possibly with 
very limited exceptions, 
such that the object meets a 
liquid market. 
The design and maintenance 
is average. Configuration is 
somewhat specific and thus 
might cause a narrower 
market for the object. 
The design and maintenance 
is below average. The asset 
is near the end of its 
economic life. Configuration 
is very specific. The market 
for the object is very narrow. 
Resale value 
The current resale value is 
well above debt value. 
The resale value is 
moderately above debt 
value. 
The resale value is slightly 
above debt value. 
The resale value is below 
debt value. 
Sensitivity of the asset value 
and liquidity to economic 
cycles 
The asset value and liquidity 
are relatively insensitive to 
economic cycles. 
The asset value and liquidity 
are sensitive to economic 
cycles. 
The asset value and liquidity 
are quite sensitive to 
economic cycles. 
The asset value and liquidity 
are highly sensitive to 
economic cycles. 
Strength of sponsor 
Operator’s financial 
strength, track record in 
managing the asset type and 
capability to re-market asset 
when it comes off-lease 
Excellent track record and 
strong re-marketing 
capability. 
Satisfactory track record and 
re-marketing capability. 
Weak or short track record 
and uncertain re-marketing 
capability. 
No or unknown track record 
and inability to re-market the 
asset. 
Sponsor’s track record and 
financial strength 
The sponsors have an 
excellent track record and 
high financial standing. 
The sponsors have a good 
track record and good 
financial standing. 
The sponsors have an 
adequate track record and 
good financial standing. 
The sponsors have a 
questionable/no track record 
and/or financial weaknesses. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment G - 77 
 
Strong 
Good 
Satisfactory 
Weak 
Security package 
Asset control 
Legal documentation 
provides the lender effective 
control (e.g. a first perfected 
security interest or a leasing 
structure including such 
security) on the asset or on 
the company owning it. 
Legal documentation 
provides the lender effective 
control (e.g. a perfected 
security interest or a leasing 
structure including such 
security) on the asset or on 
the company owning it. 
Legal documentation 
provides the lender effective 
control (e.g. a perfected 
security interest or a leasing 
structure including such 
security) on the asset, or on 
the company owning it. 
The contract provides little 
security to the lender and 
leaves room to some risk of 
losing control on the asset. 
Rights and means at the 
lender's disposal to monitor 
the location and condition of 
the asset  
The lender is able to monitor 
the location and condition of 
the asset at any time and 
place (regular reports, 
possibility to lead 
inspections). 
The lender is able to monitor 
the location and condition of 
the asset almost at any time 
and place. 
The lender is able to monitor 
the location and condition of 
the asset almost at any time 
and place. 
The lender has a limited 
ability to monitor the 
location and condition of the 
asset. 
Insurance against damages 
There is strong insurance 
coverage including collateral 
damages with top quality 
insurance companies. 
The insurance coverage is 
satisfactory (not including 
collateral damages) with 
good quality insurance 
companies. 
The insurance coverage is 
fair (not including collateral 
damages) with acceptable 
quality insurance companies. 
The insurance coverage is 
weak (not including 
collateral damages) or with 
weak quality insurance 
companies. 
 
 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment G - 78 
Table 12 Slotting criteria for commodities finance exposures 
 
Strong 
Good 
Satisfactory 
Weak 
Financial Strength 
Degree of over-
collateralisation of trade 
Strong. 
Good. 
Satisfactory. 
Weak. 
Political and legal environment 
Country risk 
No country risk. 
 
There is limited exposure to 
country risk (including 
offshore location of reserves 
in an emerging country). 
There is some exposure to 
country risk (including 
offshore location of reserves 
in an emerging country). 
There is strong exposure to 
country risk (including 
inland reserves in an 
emerging country). 
Mitigation of country risks 
Very strong mitigation. 
Strong offshore mechanisms. 
Strategic commodity. 
Excellent buyer. 
Strong mitigation. Offshore 
mechanisms. Strategic 
commodity. Strong buyer. 
Acceptable mitigation. 
Offshore mechanisms. Less 
strategic commodity. 
Acceptable buyer. 
Only partial mitigation. No 
offshore mechanisms. Non-
strategic commodity. Weak 
buyer. 
Asset characteristics 
Liquidity and susceptibility 
to damage 
The commodity is quoted 
and can be hedged through 
futures or OTC instruments. 
The commodity is not 
susceptible to damage. 
The commodity is quoted 
and can be hedged through 
OTC instruments. The 
commodity is not susceptible 
to damage. 
The commodity is not 
quoted but is liquid. There is 
uncertainty about the 
possibility of hedging. The 
commodity is not susceptible 
to damage. 
The commodity is not 
quoted. Liquidity is limited 
given the size and depth of 
the market. There are no 
appropriate hedging 
instruments. The commodity 
is susceptible to damage. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment G - 79 
 
Strong 
Good 
Satisfactory 
Weak 
Strength of sponsor 
Financial strength of trader 
Very strong, relative to 
trading philosophy and risks. 
Strong relative to trading 
philosophy and risks. 
Adequate relative to trading 
philosophy and risks. 
Weak relative to trading 
philosophy and risks. 
Track record, including 
ability to manage the logistic 
process 
Extensive experience with 
the type of transaction in 
question. Strong record of 
operating success and cost 
efficiency. 
Sufficient experience with 
the type of transaction in 
question. Above average 
record of operating success 
and cost efficiency. 
Limited experience with the 
type of transaction in 
question. Average record of 
operating success and cost 
efficiency. 
Limited or uncertain track 
record in general. Volatile 
costs and profits. 
Trading controls and 
hedging policies 
Strong standards for 
counterparty selection, 
hedging and monitoring. 
Adequate standards for 
counterparty selection, 
hedging and monitoring. 
Adequate standards for 
counterparty selection, 
hedging and monitoring. 
Past deals have experienced 
no or minor problems. 
Weak standards for 
counterparty selection, 
hedging and monitoring. 
Trader has experienced 
significant losses on past 
deals. 
Quality of financial 
disclosure 
Excellent. 
Good. 
Satisfactory. 
Financial disclosure contains 
some uncertainties or is 
insufficient. 
Security package 
Asset control 
First perfected security 
interest provides the lender 
legal control of the assets at 
any time if needed. 
First perfected security 
interest provides the lender 
legal control of the assets at 
any time if needed. 
At some point in the process, 
there is a rupture in the 
control of the assets by the 
lender. The rupture is 
mitigated by knowledge of 
the trade process or a third 
party undertaking as the case 
may be. 
Contract leaves room for 
some risk of losing control 
over the assets. Recovery 
could be jeopardised. 
FINAL 
January 2023 
 
APS 113 
 – Attachment G - 80 
 
Strong 
Good 
Satisfactory 
Weak 
Insurance against damages 
Insurance coverage is strong, 
including collateral damages 
with top quality insurance 
companies. 
Insurance coverage is 
satisfactory (not including 
collateral damages) with 
good quality insurance 
companies. 
Insurance coverage is fair 
(not including collateral 
damages) with acceptable 
quality insurance companies. 
Insurance coverage is weak 
(not including collateral 
damages) or with weak 
quality insurance companies. 
 


--- End of file: APS 113 Capital Adequacy Internal Ratings-based.txt ---

 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 - 1 
 
Prudential Standard APS 180 
Capital Adequacy: Counterparty Credit Risk 
Objectives and key requirements of this Prudential 
Standard 
This Prudential Standard requires an authorised deposit-taking institution to adopt 
risk management practices and hold sufficient regulatory capital for counterparty 
credit risk exposures arising from over-the-counter derivative transactions, 
exchange-traded derivative transactions, securities financing transactions and long 
settlement transactions. 
The key requirements of this Prudential Standard are that an authorised deposit-
taking institution must: 
• 
calculate counterparty credit risk exposure amounts according to the 
standardised approach for measuring counterparty credit risk exposures or the 
adjusted current exposure method; 
• 
apply risk weights to counterparty credit risk exposure amounts for capital 
adequacy purposes; 
• 
where applicable, calculate and hold a credit valuation adjustment risk capital 
charge; 
• 
where applicable, calculate and hold a default fund capital charge for default 
fund contributions to a qualifying central counterparty; and 
• 
adopt risk management practices for bilateral and centrally cleared 
counterparty credit risk exposures. 
 
 
 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 - 2 
Table of contents 
 
Authority ........................................................................................................... 3 
Application ....................................................................................................... 3 
Interpretation .................................................................................................... 3 
Definitions ........................................................................................................ 4 
Key principles................................................................................................... 7 
Risk-weighting approach .................................................................................. 8 
Historical rate rollovers .................................................................................... 9 
Adjustments and exclusions............................................................................. 9 
Previous exercise of discretion ........................................................................ 9 
Attachment A — Counterparty credit risk requirements for bilateral 
transactions.................................................................................................... 10 
Attachment B — Counterparty credit risk requirements for centrally 
cleared transactions ....................................................................................... 16 
Attachment C — Capital charge for default fund exposure to a QCCP .......... 25 
Attachment D — The standardised approach for measuring counterparty 
credit risk exposures (SA-CCR) ..................................................................... 30 
Attachment E — The adjusted current exposure method (adjusted CEM) ..... 52 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 - 3 
Authority 
1. 
This Prudential Standard is made under section 11AF of the Banking Act 1959 
(the Banking Act). 
Application 
2. 
This Prudential Standard applies to all authorised deposit-taking institutions 
(ADIs) with the exception of: 
(a) 
foreign ADIs; and 
(b) 
purchased payment facility providers. 
3. 
A reference to an ADI in this Prudential Standard, unless otherwise indicated, is 
a reference to: 
(a) 
an ADI on a Level 1 basis; and 
(b) 
a group of which an ADI is a member on a Level 2 basis. 
4. 
If an ADI to which this Prudential Standard applies is: 
(a) 
the holding company for a group of bodies corporate, the ADI must ensure 
that the requirements in this Prudential Standard are met on a Level 2 basis, 
where applicable; or 
(b) 
a subsidiary of an authorised non-operating holding company (authorised 
NOHC), the authorised NOHC must ensure that the requirements in this 
Prudential Standard are met on a Level 2 basis, where applicable. 
Interpretation 
5. 
Terms that are defined in Prudential Standard APS 001 Definitions appear in bold 
the first time they are used in this Prudential Standard. 
6. 
Where this Prudential Standard provides for APRA to exercise a power or 
discretion, this power or discretion will be exercised in writing. 
7. 
In this Prudential Standard, unless the contrary intention appears, a reference to 
an Act, Regulations or Prudential Standard is a reference to the Act, Regulations 
or Prudential Standard as in force from time to time. 
 
 
 
 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 - 4 
Definitions 
8. 
The following definitions are used in this Prudential Standard: 
(a) 
adjusted current exposure method (CEM) — the adjusted CEM approach 
for measuring counterparty credit risk exposures is the methodology set out 
in Attachment E of this Prudential Standard; 
(b) 
central counterparty (CCP) — is a clearing house that interposes itself 
between counterparties to contracts traded in one or more financial markets, 
becoming the buyer to every seller and the seller to every buyer. A CCP 
becomes counterparty to trades with market participants through novation, 
an open offer system or another legally binding arrangement. For the 
purposes of the capital framework, a CCP is a financial institution; 
(c) 
clearing member — is a member of, or a direct participant in, a CCP that is 
entitled to enter into a transaction with the CCP; 
(d) 
client of a clearing member — is a party to a transaction with a CCP through 
either a clearing member acting as a financial intermediary, or a clearing 
member guaranteeing the performance of the client to the CCP; 
(e) 
close-out netting — is the process of combining all outstanding transactions 
and reducing them to a single net payment in the event of default by a 
counterparty to a netting agreement; 
(f) 
counterparty credit risk — is the risk that the counterparty to a transaction 
could default before the final settlement of the transaction’s cash flows. An 
economic loss would occur if the transactions or portfolio of transactions 
with the counterparty has a positive economic value at the time of default; 
(g) 
default funds — are clearing members’ funded or unfunded contributions 
towards, or underwriting of, a CCP’s mutualised loss-sharing 
arrangements; 
(h) 
eligible bilateral netting agreement — has the meaning in paragraph 7 of 
Attachment I of Prudential Standard APS 112 Capital Adequacy: 
Standardised Approach to Credit Risk (APS 112); 
(i) 
exchange-traded derivative — is a derivative that is transacted directly 
through an organised, licensed and regulated exchange; 
(j) 
hedging set — under the SA-CCR, a set of transactions under a single 
netting set within which partial or full offsetting may be recognised for the 
purposes of calculating the potential future exposure add-on; 
(k) 
independent collateral amount (ICA) — represents: 
(i) 
collateral (other than variation margin) posted by a counterparty that 
an ADI may seize upon default of the counterparty, the amount of 
which does not change in response to the value of the transactions it 
secures; and/or 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 - 5 
(ii) 
the Independent Amount parameter as defined in standard industry 
documentation. 
While ICA does not change in response to the value of the transactions it 
secures, it may change in response to factors such as the value of the 
collateral or a change in the number of transactions in the netting set. For 
clarity, initial margin for both centrally cleared and non-centrally cleared 
derivative transactions is included as ICA within the SA-CCR methodology 
outlined in Attachment D of this Prudential Standard; 
(l) 
initial margin — is collateral that is collected to cover the potential future 
exposure that could arise from future changes in the market value of a 
derivative transaction over the close-out period in the event of a 
counterparty default; 
(m) IRB ADI — is an ADI with approval from APRA to use an internal ratings-
based (IRB) approach to credit risk; 
(n) 
long settlement transaction — is a transaction where a counterparty 
undertakes to receive or deliver a security, a commodity or a foreign 
exchange amount against cash, other financial instruments or commodities 
at a contractually specified settlement or delivery date that is more than the 
lesser of (i) the market standard for the particular instrument, and (ii) five 
business days after the date on which the parties enter into the transaction; 
(o) 
margin period of risk (MPOR) — is an estimated time period from the last 
exchange of collateral covering a netting set of transactions with a 
defaulting counterparty until the counterparty is closed out and the resulting 
market risk is re-hedged. For the purposes of measuring counterparty credit 
risk exposures using SA-CCR, MPOR must satisfy the conditions of the 
minimum holding period specified in paragraphs 39 and 40 of 
Attachment G of APS 112. MPOR must be measured in years; 
(p) 
net independent collateral amount (NICA) — is the amount of collateral 
that an ADI may use to offset its exposure on the default of the counterparty. 
NICA is equal to any ICA (segregated or unsegregated) received by the 
ADI less the unsegregated ICA posted by the ADI. NICA does not include 
any collateral an ADI has posted to a segregated, bankruptcy-remote 
account that would be returned to the ADI upon the bankruptcy of the 
counterparty; 
(q) 
netting — is the process under a netting agreement of combining all relevant 
outstanding transactions between two counterparties and reducing them to 
a single net sum for a party to either pay or receive; 
(r) 
netting by novation — is a netting agreement between two counterparties 
under which any obligation between the parties to deliver a given currency 
(or equity, debt instrument or commodity) on a given date is automatically 
amalgamated with all other obligations under the netting agreement for the 
same currency (or other instrument or commodity) and value date. The 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 - 6 
result is to legally substitute a single net amount for the previous gross 
obligations; 
(s) 
netting set — is a group of transactions with a single counterparty that is 
subject to an eligible bilateral netting agreement under this Prudential 
Standard. If a transaction with a counterparty is not subject to an eligible 
bilateral netting agreement, it comprises its own netting set; 
(t) 
offsetting transaction — is the transaction leg between the clearing member 
and the CCP when the clearing member acts on behalf of a client (e.g. when 
a clearing member clears or novates a client’s trade); 
(u) 
over-collateralisation — is when the haircut value of collateral held is 
greater than the net market value of the derivative contracts covered by the 
collateral. Conversely, under-collateralisation occurs when the haircut 
value of collateral held is less than the net market value of the derivative 
contracts; 
(v) 
over-the-counter (OTC) derivative transaction — is a customised, privately 
negotiated, risk-shifting agreement, the value of which is derived from the 
value of an underlying asset; 
(w) qualifying CCP (QCCP) — is an entity that is licensed to operate as a CCP 
(including a licence granted by way of confirming an exemption), and is 
permitted by the CCP’s regulator/supervisor to operate as such with respect 
to the products offered. The entity must be based and prudentially 
supervised in a jurisdiction where the relevant regulator/overseer has 
established, and publicly indicated that it applies to the CCP on an ongoing 
basis, domestic rules and regulations that are consistent with the Committee 
on Payments and Market Infrastructures and International Organization of 
Securities Commissions (CPMI-IOSCO) Principles for Financial Market 
Infrastructures. In order for a CCP to be a QCCP, it must also calculate or 
make available the necessary data to allow for the calculation of an ADI’s 
default fund capital charge; 
(x) 
reference entity — the entity or entities whose obligations are used to 
determine whether a credit event has occurred under the terms of a credit 
derivative contract; 
(y) 
reference obligation — the obligation used to calculate the amount payable 
when a credit event occurs under the terms of a credit derivative contract. 
A reference obligation is relevant for obligations that are to be cash settled 
(on a par-less-recovery basis);1 
(z) 
SA-CCR — the standardised approach for measuring counterparty credit 
risk exposures (SA-CCR) is the methodology set out in Attachment D of 
this Prudential Standard; 
                                                 
1  
A reference obligation will typically also be a deliverable obligation unless otherwise excluded. 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 - 7 
(aa) securities financing transactions (SFTs) — are transactions such as 
repurchase agreements, reverse repurchase agreements and securities 
lending and borrowing transactions where the value of the transactions 
depends on the market valuation of securities and the transactions are 
typically subject to margin agreements; 
(bb) settled-to-market — refers to a centrally cleared derivative transaction 
where the variation margin paid constitutes settlement of an exposure, as 
opposed to the posting of collateral; 
(cc) standardised ADI — is an ADI that does not have approval from APRA to 
use an IRB approach to credit risk; 
(dd) threshold — is the amount specified in a margin agreement that defines the 
level of exposure above which margin will be posted. The threshold 
represents the amount of uncollateralised exposure allowed under the 
margin agreement; 
(ee) trade exposure — is an exposure a clearing member or a client of a clearing 
member has to a CCP reflecting a measure of the current mark-to-market 
value (replacement cost) and the potential future exposure arising from 
OTC derivative transactions, exchange-traded derivative transactions, SFTs 
and long settlement transactions. Trade exposure is calculated on a bilateral 
basis, and must include the initial margin posted by an ADI, as well as any 
variation margin due to the ADI from the CCP that has not yet been 
received; and 
(ff) variation margin — is collateral that is collected or paid to reflect the 
current mark-to-market exposure resulting from changes in the market 
value of a derivative. 
Key principles 
9. 
An ADI must include all OTC derivative transactions and exchange-traded 
derivative transactions (collectively ‘derivative transactions’), long settlement 
transactions2 and SFTs held in the banking and trading books in applying the 
counterparty credit risk requirements set out in this Prudential Standard. 
10. 
An ADI must apply the counterparty credit risk requirements: 
(a) 
for all bilateral transactions, as set out in Attachment A of this Prudential 
Standard; 
(b) 
for all centrally cleared transactions, as set out in Attachment B of this 
Prudential Standard; and 
(c) 
for any default fund contribution to a QCCP, as set out in Attachment C of 
this Prudential Standard; 
                                                 
2  
For the purposes of this Prudential Standard, long settlement transactions must be treated as OTC 
derivatives transactions. 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 - 8 
(d) 
for an ADI with approval from APRA to use an internal ratings-based 
(IRB) approach to credit risk (IRB ADI), the standardised approach for 
measuring counterparty credit risk exposures (SA-CCR) as set out in 
Attachment D of this Prudential Standard to calculate its counterparty credit 
risk exposure amount; or 
(e) 
for an ADI that does not have approval from APRA to use an IRB approach 
to credit risk (standardised ADI), the adjusted CEM as set out in Attachment 
E of this Prudential Standard to calculate its counterparty credit risk 
exposure amount. 
11. 
APRA may, upon request of a standardised ADI, approve the ADI to use the SA-
CCR to calculate its counterparty credit risk exposure amount. 
12. 
APRA may require a standardised ADI to use the SA-CCR to calculate its 
counterparty credit risk exposure amount. 
13. 
The counterparty credit risk requirements comprise: 
(a) 
the risk-weighted credit exposures for counterparty credit risk, calculated 
as the sum of any applicable: 
(i) 
risk-weighted credit exposures for counterparty credit default risk 
(‘default risk RWE’); 
(ii) 
risk-weighted credit exposures for counterparty credit default risk 
arising from trade exposure to a CCP (‘trade exposure RWE’); and 
(iii) risk-weighted credit exposure arising from a default fund contribution 
to a non-qualifying CCP (‘default fund RWE’); 
(b) 
any applicable credit valuation adjustment (CVA) risk capital charge; and 
(c) 
any applicable default fund capital charge for any default fund contribution 
to a QCCP. 
14. 
For all centrally cleared transactions, an ADI must apply the risk management 
requirements in paragraphs 30 to 39 of Attachment B. 
Risk-weighting approach 
15. 
For the purposes of determining the risk-weighted credit exposures for 
counterparty credit risk, this paragraph must be read in conjunction with APS 112 
and, for an IRB ADI, Prudential Standard APS 113 Capital Adequacy: Internal 
Ratings-based Approach to Credit Risk (APS 113). Risk weights must be 
determined in the following manner: 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 - 9 
(a) 
an IRB ADI must determine the risk weights for bilateral transactions in 
accordance with APS 113;3 
(b) 
a standardised ADI must determine the risk weights for bilateral 
transactions in accordance with APS 112; 
(c) 
an ADI must determine the risk weights for trade exposures with a CCP in 
accordance with Attachment B of this Prudential Standard.; and 
(d) 
an ADI must determine the risk weights for default fund exposures with a 
non-qualifying CCP in accordance with Attachment B of this Prudential 
Standard. 
16. 
APRA may determine a higher or lower risk weight for a particular exposure of 
an ADI where APRA considers that the ADI has not risk weighted the exposure 
appropriately. 
Historical rate rollovers 
17. 
An ADI must not enter into market-related contracts at off-market prices other 
than historical rate rollovers on foreign exchange contracts. An ADI must have a 
policy framework in place agreed to by APRA that sets out its systems and 
controls for approving and monitoring these rollovers and adequately restricts the 
ADI’s capacity to enter into such contracts. Transactions outside of the agreed 
framework must be discussed with APRA to determine their appropriate 
treatment. 
Adjustments and exclusions 
18. 
APRA may adjust or exclude a specific prudential requirement in this Prudential 
Standard in relation to one or more specified ADIs or authorised NOHCs.4 
Previous exercise of discretion 
19. 
An ADI must contact APRA if it seeks to place reliance, for the purposes of 
complying with this Prudential Standard, on a previous exemption or other 
exercise of discretion by APRA under APS 112. 
 
                                                 
3  
For the avoidance of doubt, an IRB ADI that has IRB approval for a portion of its exposures must 
determine the risk weights for exposures subject to the standardised approach to credit risk in 
accordance with APS 112, as required under APS 113.  
4 
Refer to subsection 11AF(2) of the Banking Act. 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment A - 10 
Attachment A — Counterparty credit risk 
requirements for bilateral transactions 
1. 
This Attachment applies to OTC derivative transactions, SFTs and long 
settlement transactions that are not centrally cleared. For the purposes of this 
Attachment, a long settlement transaction must be treated as an OTC derivative 
transaction. 
2. 
This Attachment also applies to centrally cleared transactions, including 
exchange-traded derivative transactions, which are required to be treated as 
bilateral transactions under Attachment B. 
3. 
For bilateral OTC derivative transactions, an ADI must calculate each of the 
following counterparty credit risk requirements: 
(a) 
default risk RWE, which reflects the potential loss arising from a default of 
a counterparty (refer to paragraphs 6 to 12 of this Attachment); and 
(b) 
a CVA risk capital charge, which accounts for mark-to-market losses 
arising from a deterioration in a counterparty’s credit quality (refer to 
paragraphs 13 to 20 of this Attachment). 
4. 
For bilateral SFTs, an ADI must calculate default risk RWE. To determine default 
risk RWE for SFTs, an ADI must calculate the counterparty credit risk exposure 
amount according to APS 1125 and apply the applicable risk weight according to 
the requirements of APS 112, or for an IRB ADI, according to the requirements 
of APS 113. 
5. 
Bilateral SFTs are not subject to a CVA risk capital charge unless APRA has 
determined that an ADI’s CVA loss exposure arising from SFTs is material and 
notified the ADI that it must calculate a CVA risk capital charge according to 
paragraphs 13 to 20 of this Attachment. 
Default risk RWE for OTC derivative transactions 
6. 
To determine default risk RWE for OTC derivative transactions, an ADI must 
calculate a counterparty credit risk exposure amount and apply the relevant risk 
weight in accordance with paragraph 12 of this Attachment. 
7. 
The counterparty credit risk exposure amount is: 
(a) 
for an IRB ADI, the exposure at default (EAD) calculated according to the 
SA-CCR; or 
                                                 
5  
The total exposure amount for bilateral SFTs must be calculated by adding together the exposure 
amount for each SFT not covered by an eligible netting agreement (refer to Attachment G of 
APS 112) and the exposure amount for all SFTs covered by an eligible netting agreement (refer 
to Attachment I of APS 112). 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment A - 11 
(b) 
for a standardised ADI, the credit equivalent amount (CEA) calculated 
according to the adjusted CEM. 
Counterparty credit risk exposure amount under the SA-CCR 
8. 
Under the SA-CCR, the counterparty credit risk exposure amount is the EAD for 
all OTC derivative transactions with a given counterparty, calculated according 
to the SA-CCR methodology in Attachment D. Eligible netting and 
collateralisation are incorporated in the SA-CCR methodology. 
Counterparty credit risk exposure amount under the adjusted CEM 
9. 
Under the adjusted CEM, the counterparty credit risk exposure amount is the CEA 
for all OTC derivative transactions with a given counterparty, calculated by 
adding together: 
(a) 
the transaction-level CEA calculated under the adjusted CEM methodology 
in Attachment E for each transaction not covered by an eligible bilateral 
netting agreement; and 
(b) 
the CEA calculated under the adjusted CEM methodology in Attachment E 
for transactions covered by an eligible bilateral netting agreement that meet 
the criteria set out in Attachment I of APS 112; 
and adjusting the sum for collateral that meets the eligibility criteria for the 
adjusted CEM set out in Attachment G of APS 112. 
Adjustment for incurred CVA under the SA-CCR and adjusted CEM6 
10. 
For all OTC derivative transactions, the counterparty-level EAD or CEA must be 
adjusted for incurred CVA by subtracting the CVA amount for the counterparty 
that has already been recognised by the ADI as an incurred write-down (i.e. a 
CVA loss). The incurred CVA loss must be calculated according to the ADI’s 
own valuation methodology and must not include any debit value adjustment 
(DVA).  
Credit risk mitigation 
11. 
Forms of credit risk mitigation including guarantees and credit derivatives may 
be used to reduce default risk RWE. The eligibility and other requirements for 
application are as set out in APS 112. 
Risk weighting 
12. 
The applicable risk weight for a counterparty credit risk exposure amount is 
determined according to the requirements of: 
                                                 
6  
No adjustment to CVA should be included for SFTs. 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment A - 12 
(a) 
APS 113 for an IRB ADI;7 or 
(b) 
APS 112 for a standardised ADI. 
CVA risk capital charge 
13. 
An ADI must calculate its CVA risk capital charge for the risk of mark-to-market 
losses on the expected counterparty credit risk (CVA loss) for all bilateral OTC 
derivative transactions and centrally cleared transactions required to be treated as 
bilateral. The CVA risk capital charge is calculated using the CVA approach 
outlined in paragraphs 16 to 20 of this Attachment, unless the conditions under 
paragraph 14 of this Attachment are satisfied. 
14. 
An ADI, other than an ADI with either funded or unfunded default fund 
contributions to a CCP, may apply to APRA for approval to determine its CVA 
risk capital requirement according to a simplified approach, instead of the 
approach set out in paragraphs 16 to 20 of this Attachment. APRA may approve 
an application made under this paragraph. 
15. 
Where an ADI has obtained approval from APRA under paragraph 14 of this 
Attachment, the ADI must set its CVA risk capital charge equal to the amount of 
capital required for its risk-weighted credit exposure for counterparty credit 
default risk. 
16. 
An ADI must calculate its CVA risk capital charge, 𝐾𝐾𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶, according to one of the 
three following formulae: 
(a) 
an ADI that has OTC derivative exposure to only one counterparty must 
calculate its CVA risk capital charge as: 
𝐾𝐾𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶= 2.33 × 𝑤𝑤× 𝑀𝑀× 𝐷𝐷× 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡 
where: 
𝑤𝑤 = the weight applicable to the counterparty determined according to 
paragraph 17 of this Attachment; 
𝑀𝑀 = the weighted average maturity in years (weighted by notional amount) 
of all OTC derivative transactions with the counterparty, determined 
according to paragraphs 33 to 41 of Attachment B of APS 113, except that 
𝑀𝑀 is not capped at five years; 
𝐷𝐷=
1−𝑒𝑒−0.05𝑀𝑀
0.05M ; and8 
                                                 
7  
For the avoidance of doubt, an IRB ADI that has IRB approval for a portion of its exposures must 
determine the risk weights for exposures subject to the standardised approach to credit risk in 
accordance with APS 112, as required under APS 113. 
8  
D is the supervisory discount factor based on an interest rate of five per cent per annum and term 
to maturity of M years, and e (≈2.71828) is the base of the natural logarithm. 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment A - 13 
For an IRB ADI, 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡  = the EAD for the counterparty under SA-
CCR without any adjustment for incurred CVA; 
For a standardised ADI, 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡 = the counterparty-level CEA 
under the adjusted CEM without any adjustment for incurred CVA; 
If there is more than one netting set for the counterparty, an ADI must 
determine 𝑀𝑀, 𝐷𝐷 and 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡 separately for each netting set, and 
calculate the sum of 𝑀𝑀× 𝐷𝐷× 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡 over all netting sets.9 The 
calculation of 𝑀𝑀 applies at the netting set level; 
(b) 
an ADI that has OTC derivative exposures to more than one counterparty, 
but does not allow for CVA hedges in accordance with paragraphs 18 to 20 
of this Attachment, must calculate its CVA risk capital charge as: 
𝐾𝐾𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶
= 2.33ඩ0.25 ൭෍𝑤𝑤𝑖𝑖𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑖𝑖
𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡
𝑖𝑖
൱
2
+ 0.75 ෍൫𝑤𝑤𝑖𝑖𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑖𝑖
𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡൯
2
𝑖𝑖
 
where the summations (subscript 𝑖𝑖) are by counterparty; and 
(c) 
an ADI that has OTC derivative exposures to more than one counterparty, 
and has in place eligible CVA hedges in accordance with paragraphs 18 to 
20 of this Attachment, must calculate its CVA risk capital charge as: 
𝐾𝐾𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶= 2.33
⎷
⃓⃓⃓⃓⃓⃓⃓⃓⃓⃓⃓⃓⃓⃓⃓ለ
⎝
⎜
⎛
෍0.5𝑤𝑤𝑖𝑖൫𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑖𝑖
𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡−𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖
ℎ𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖
ℎ𝑒𝑒𝑑𝑑𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝐵𝐵𝑖𝑖൯
𝑖𝑖
−෍𝑤𝑤𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝐵𝐵𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖
𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖
⎠
⎟
⎞
2
+0.75 ෍𝑤𝑤𝑖𝑖2൫𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑖𝑖
𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡−𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖
ℎ𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖
ℎ𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝐵𝐵𝑖𝑖൯
2
𝑖𝑖
 
where: 
𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖
ℎ𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒= the maturity in years of the purchased single name credit default 
swap (CDS) hedge referencing counterparty 𝑖𝑖 and used to hedge CVA risk; 
𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖
ℎ𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒 = 
1−𝑒𝑒−0.05𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖
ℎ𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒
0.05𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖
ℎ𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒; 
𝐵𝐵𝑖𝑖 = the notional amount of the purchased single-name CDS hedge 
referencing counterparty 𝑖𝑖 and used to hedge CVA risk; 
                                                 
9  
This approach also applies for the  𝐾𝐾𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 calculations in paragraphs 16(b) and 16(c) of this 
Attachment.  
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment A - 14 
𝑤𝑤𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 = the weight applicable to the ‘ind’ CDS index determined according 
to paragraph 17 of this Attachment; 
𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 = the maturity in years of ‘ind’ CDS index purchased protection; 
𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖=
1−𝑒𝑒−0.05Mind
0.05Mind  ; and 
𝐵𝐵𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 = the notional amount of ‘ind’ CDS index purchased protection used 
to hedge CVA risk. 
An ADI that has more than one purchased single-name CDS hedge 
referencing counterparty 𝑖𝑖 used to hedge CVA risk, must replace 
𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖
ℎ𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖
ℎ𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝐵𝐵𝑖𝑖 in the formula above by the sum over all such hedges: 
𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝐵𝐵𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖= ෍𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑑𝑑,𝑗𝑗𝐵𝐵𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗
𝑗𝑗
 
where each hedge is denoted by the subscript 𝑗𝑗= 1,2,3, … 
An ADI that has purchased more than one CDS index protection to hedge 
CVA risk must replace 𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝐵𝐵𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 in the formula above by the sum over 
all such hedges: 
𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝐵𝐵𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖= ෍𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗𝐵𝐵𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗
𝑗𝑗
 
where each hedge is denoted by the subscript 𝑗𝑗= 1,2,3, … 
17. 
For the purposes of calculating the CVA risk capital charge, an ADI must 
determine the weight for a counterparty or credit index by its credit rating grade 
according to Table 1 below. 
Table 1: CVA risk capital formula weights 
Long term credit rating grade 
Weight (%) 
1 
0.7 
2 
0.8 
3 
1.0 
4 or unrated 
2.0 
5 
3.0 
6 
10.0 
 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment A - 15 
18. 
An ADI may include eligible CVA hedges in the calculation of the CVA risk 
capital charge as set out in paragraph 16(c) of this Attachment subject to the 
following conditions: 
(a) 
to qualify as an eligible CVA hedge, the hedge must be transacted with an 
external counterparty, used for the purposes of mitigating CVA risk, and 
managed as such; 
(b) 
the only CDS hedges that may qualify as eligible CVA hedges are single-
name CDS (including sovereign CDS), single-name contingent CDS, other 
equivalent hedging instruments referencing the counterparty directly, and 
index CDS. A tranched or nth-to-default CDS may not be treated as an 
eligible CVA hedge; and 
(c) 
an instrument for which the associated payment depends on cross-default 
(such as a related entity hedged with a reference entity CDS and CDS 
triggers) may not be treated as an eligible CVA hedge. If restructuring is 
not included in the CDS contract then the proportion of that CDS hedge that 
may be treated as an eligible CVA hedge is as in accordance with the rules 
regarding specific risk offsetting set out in Attachment D of Prudential 
Standard APS 116 Capital Adequacy: Market Risk (APS 116). 
19. 
Other types of counterparty risk hedges must not be reflected within the 
calculation of the CVA risk capital charge, and these other hedges must be treated 
as any other instrument in the ADI’s inventory for Regulatory Capital purposes. 
Eligible CVA hedges that are included in the CVA risk capital charge must not 
be included in the ADI’s market risk capital charge calculation under APS 116. 
20. 
If a counterparty is also a constituent of an index on which a CDS is used for 
hedging counterparty credit risk, the notional amount attributable to that single 
name (as per its reference entity weight) may, with APRA’s approval, be 
subtracted from the index CDS notional amount and treated as a single name 
eligible CVA hedge of the individual counterparty with maturity using the 
maturity of the index. 
 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment B - 16 
Attachment B — Counterparty credit risk 
requirements for centrally cleared transactions 
1. 
This Attachment applies to all transactions that are centrally cleared, including 
OTC derivative transactions, exchange-traded derivative transactions, SFTs and 
long settlement transactions. For the purposes of this Attachment, a long 
settlement transaction must be treated as an OTC derivative transaction.  
Transactions that result in exposures arising from the settlement of cash 
transactions only (e.g. equities, fixed income, spot foreign exchange (FX) and 
spot commodities) are not subject to this treatment. 10 
2. 
For transactions cleared through a QCCP, an ADI must apply the counterparty 
credit risk requirements for exposures to a QCCP and the ADI’s clients in 
accordance with paragraphs 9 to 28 of this Attachment, and the risk management 
requirements in accordance with paragraphs 30 to 34 of this Attachment. 
3. 
Where a CCP does not meet the definition of a QCCP in paragraph 8(w) of this 
Prudential Standard, or where a CCP does not meet all of the requirements in 
paragraph 6 of Attachment C, the CCP is considered to be a non-qualifying CCP. 
An ADI must apply the counterparty credit risk requirements for exposures to a 
non-qualifying CCP in accordance with paragraph 29 of this Attachment and the 
risk management requirements in accordance with paragraphs 30 to 34 of this 
Attachment. 
4. 
Within three months of a CCP ceasing to qualify as a QCCP, unless required 
otherwise by APRA, the transactions with a former QCCP may, for the purposes 
of this Attachment, continue to be treated as though they are with a QCCP. After 
that time, the ADI’s exposures with such a CCP must be treated according to 
paragraph 29 of this Attachment. 
5. 
For the purposes of calculating an ADI’s exposure to a CCP: 
(a) 
initial margin is the funded collateral posted to a CCP to mitigate the 
potential future exposure of the CCP to the clearing member, including 
collateral deposited by a clearing member or a client that may be in excess 
of the minimum required amount provided there are appropriate 
arrangements in place to prevent the withdrawal of such excess collateral 
by the clearing member of the client. Initial margin does not include an 
ADI’s contribution to a CCP for a mutualised loss-sharing arrangement (i.e. 
a default fund contribution); and 
(b) 
variation margin is the funded collateral posted on a daily or intraday basis 
to a CCP to mitigate movements in ongoing mark-to-market exposure. 
                                                 
10  
For contributions to prepaid default funds covering settlement risk-only products, the applicable 
risk weight is zero per cent. 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment B - 17 
6. 
An ADI may treat a transaction as settled-to-market and an unmargined 
transaction with the remaining maturity (𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖) equal to the time until the next 
exchange of variation margin if: 
(a) 
the outstanding exposure is settled by variation margin and the terms are 
reset so that the fair value of the contract is zero; and 
(b) 
the ADI has legal opinion to support such treatment of variation margin.11 
7. 
For an exchange-traded derivative where the transaction between the clearing 
member and client is conducted under a bilateral agreement, an ADI that is either 
a clearing member (clearing member ADI) or a client (client ADI) must treat the 
transaction as an OTC derivative transaction for the purposes of this Attachment. 
8. 
Where the amount of capital required for an ADI’s exposure to a QCCP due to its 
trade exposure and default fund contribution is higher than would be applied if 
the CCP were a non-qualifying CCP, the required capital is capped at the amount 
for a non-qualifying CCP. 
Exposures arising from transactions cleared through a QCCP 
9. 
For transactions cleared through a QCCP, a clearing member ADI must calculate 
each of the following counterparty credit risk requirements: 
(a) 
trade exposure RWE on the clearing member ADI’s trade exposure12 to the 
QCCP according to paragraphs 11 to 18 of this Attachment; and 
(b) 
a default fund capital charge on the default fund contribution to the QCCP 
calculated according to Attachment C of this Prudential Standard; and 
(c) 
where a clearing member ADI has provided a guarantee of a client 
transaction to the QCCP or acts as a financial intermediary between a client 
and the QCCP (i.e. the clearing member completes an offsetting transaction 
with the QCCP), default risk RWE and a CVA risk capital charge on the 
counterparty credit risk exposure to its client, calculated according to 
paragraph 19 of this Attachment; and 
(d) 
where a clearing member ADI has provided a guarantee to a client, by 
undertaking any obligation to reimburse a client for any losses suffered due 
to changes in transaction value in the event that a QCCP defaults, trade 
exposure RWE and a default fund capital charge on the guaranteed 
transaction. 
10. 
For an ADI acting as a client of a clearing member to a QCCP, the client ADI 
must apply the counterparty credit risk requirements specified in paragraphs 20 
to 24 of this Attachment. 
                                                 
11  
The remaining maturity (𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖) of an unmargined transaction is subject to a floor of 10 business 
days. as per paragraph 48(a) of Attachment D. 
12  
Trade exposure includes any posted collateral but excludes any default fund contributions. Refer 
to paragraph 8(ee) for the complete definition of trade exposure. 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment B - 18 
Trade exposure RWE for a clearing member ADI’s exposure to a QCCP 
11. 
To calculate trade exposure RWE, a clearing member ADI must calculate its trade 
exposure to the QCCP and apply the relevant risk weights according to 
paragraphs 12 to 18 of this Attachment. 
12. 
For the clearing member ADI-to-QCCP leg of a transaction cleared through a 
QCCP, a clearing member ADI must calculate its trade exposure to the QCCP 
using the SA-CCR (refer to Attachment D) for all derivative transactions and in 
accordance with the requirements of paragraph 4 of Attachment A for all SFTs. 
In addition, for centrally cleared transactions treated as margined transactions, the 
following conditions apply: 
(a) 
for all OTC derivative transactions, apply a margin period of risk (MPOR) 
of at least 10 business days; 
(b) 
for all other transactions, apply a MPOR or holding period that is at least 
equal to that applicable if the transaction were a bilateral transaction; 
(c) 
for a netting set where the number of trades exceeds 5,000 at any point 
during a quarter, the 20-business day floor for MPOR specified in 
paragraph 40 of Attachment G of APS 112 does not apply if the netting set 
does not contain any illiquid collateral, exotic trades or disputed trades; and 
(d) 
where a QCCP retains variation margin against certain transactions and that 
variation margin is not protected against the insolvency of the QCCP, set 
the transaction’s maturity factor (MF) under the SA-CCR to that of the 
unmargined case under paragraph 48 of Attachment D. 
13. 
A clearing member ADI may calculate its trade exposure to a QCCP applying 
appropriate netting when the below two conditions are satisfied: 
(a) 
settlement is legally enforceable on a net basis in an event of default 
regardless of whether the counterparty is insolvent or bankrupt; and 
(b) 
all netting agreements meet the requirements for the bilateral case set out in 
Attachment I of APS 112.13 
14. 
Where a clearing member ADI cannot demonstrate that a netting agreement meets 
the requirements in paragraph 13 of this Attachment, it must treat each single 
transaction with the QCCP as a netting set of its own for the calculation of trade 
exposure. 
15. 
If a clearing member ADI first collects collateral from a client for a client-cleared 
trade and then this collateral is passed on to the QCCP, the ADI may recognise 
                                                 
13  
To the extent that the rules referenced in Attachment I of APS 112 include the term ‘master 
agreement’ or the phrase ‘a netting contract with a counterparty or other agreement’, this 
terminology must be read as including any enforceable arrangement that provides legally 
enforceable rights of set-off. 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment B - 19 
this collateral for both the QCCP-to-clearing member leg and the clearing 
member-to-client leg of the client-cleared transaction. 
16. 
Where a clearing member ADI is transacting with a QCCP for its own purposes, 
the clearing member ADI must apply a two per cent risk weight to its trade 
exposure to the QCCP (excluding any posted collateral eligible for a zero risk 
weight under paragraph 27(a) of this Attachment). 
17. 
Where a clearing member ADI offers clearing services to clients, the clearing 
member ADI must apply a two per cent risk weight to its trade exposure to the 
QCCP (excluding any posted collateral eligible for a zero risk weight under 
paragraph 27(a) of this Attachment) arising from any obligations to reimburse a 
client for any losses suffered due to changes in transaction value in the event that 
the QCCP defaults. 
18. 
The risk weight applied to any collateral posted by a clearing member ADI to the 
QCCP that is included in the definition of trade exposure in paragraph 8(ee) of 
this Prudential Standard must be determined in accordance with paragraphs 25 to 
28 of this Attachment. 
Clearing member ADI’s exposure to clients 
19. 
For the clearing member ADI-to-client leg of a transaction with a QCCP, a 
clearing member ADI must calculate its counterparty credit risk requirements on 
its exposures to its clients following the requirements for bilateral transactions set 
out in Attachment A (comprising both default risk RWE and a CVA risk capital 
charge). However, to recognise the shorter close-out period for cleared client 
derivative transactions, the clearing member ADI may apply a minimum MPOR 
of five business days in calculating the clearing member ADI’s exposure amounts 
to its clients under the SA-CCR (refer to Attachment D). The reduced EAD may 
also be used in the calculation of the CVA risk capital charge. 
Client ADI’s exposure to a QCCP 
20. 
An ADI is considered a ‘client ADI’ where: 
(a) 
the ADI clears through a QCCP indirectly as a client of a clearing member 
acting as a financial intermediary (i.e. the clearing member completes an 
offsetting transaction with the QCCP); or 
(b) 
the ADI enters into a transaction with a QCCP, with a clearing member 
guaranteeing the client ADI’s performance, 
21. 
A client ADI must: 
(a) 
calculate a trade exposure to the clearing member ADI or QCCP, as the case 
may be, using: 
(i) 
for an IRB ADI, the SA-CCR (refer to Attachment D); or 
(ii) 
for a standardised ADI, the adjusted CEM (refer to Attachment E); 
and 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment B - 20 
(b) 
risk weight the trade exposure according to the requirements in paragraphs 
22 to 24 of this Attachment. 
22. 
A client ADI must treat its trade exposure (excluding any posted collateral 
eligible for a zero risk weight under paragraph 28(a) of this Attachment), as if it 
were a clearing member ADI’s trade exposure to the QCCP, and apply the 
requirements set out in paragraphs 11 to 16 of this Attachment when the following 
three conditions are met: 
(a) 
the offsetting transactions are identified by the QCCP as client transactions 
and the collateral to support the offsetting transactions is held in a manner 
that prevents any losses to the client ADI due to either the default or 
insolvency of the clearing member, or the default or insolvency of the 
clearing member’s other clients. Additionally, the client ADI must have 
conducted a sufficient legal review, and undertake further review as 
necessary to ensure continuing enforceability of the arrangements. The 
client ADI must have a well-founded basis to conclude that, in the event of 
legal challenge, the relevant courts and administrative authorities would 
find that the arrangements would be legal, valid, binding and enforceable 
under the relevant laws of the relevant jurisdiction(s); 
(b) 
the collateral supporting the offsetting transactions is held in a manner that 
prevents any losses to the client ADI due to the joint default or insolvency 
of the clearing member and any of its other clients. Additionally, the client 
ADI must have conducted a sufficient legal review, and undertake further 
review as necessary to ensure continuing enforceability of the 
arrangements. The client ADI must have a well-founded basis to conclude 
that, in the event of legal challenge, the relevant courts and administrative 
authorities would find that the arrangements would be legal, valid, binding 
and enforceable under the relevant laws of the relevant jurisdiction(s); and 
(c) 
the relevant laws, regulation, rules, contractual or administrative 
arrangements provide that the offsetting transactions with the defaulted or 
insolvent clearing member are highly likely to continue to be indirectly 
transacted through the QCCP, or by the QCCP, if the clearing member 
defaults or becomes insolvent. In such circumstances, the client positions 
and collateral with the QCCP will be transferred at market value unless the 
client ADI requests to close out the position at market value. 
23. 
Where only conditions (a) and (c) of paragraph 22 of this Attachment are 
satisfied, the client ADI must apply a risk weight of four per cent to its calculated 
trade exposure to the QCCP (excluding any posted collateral eligible for a zero 
risk weight under paragraph 28(a) of this Attachment). The applicable risk weight 
on collateral posted by the client ADI that is included in the definition of trade 
exposure must be determined according to paragraphs 25 to 28 of this 
Attachment.14 
24. 
In any other case, the client ADI must treat the exposure as bilateral for the 
purposes of all counterparty credit risk requirements and apply the treatment set 
                                                 
14  
Trade exposure is defined in paragraph 8(bb) of this Prudential Standard. 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment B - 21 
out in Attachment A (comprising both default risk RWE and a CVA risk capital 
charge). 
Exposures arising from collateral posted to a QCCP 
25. 
For the purposes of this Attachment, collateral posted by an ADI to the QCCP 
includes but is not limited to: initial margin, any variation margin due to the ADI 
from the QCCP but not yet received, cash, securities, other pledged assets and 
any excess initial or variation margin. Posted collateral does not include any 
default fund contribution. 
26. 
An ADI that has posted collateral to a QCCP must risk weight those assets in 
accordance with the relevant banking book or trading book treatment that would 
otherwise apply regardless of the fact that such assets have been posted as 
collateral. 
27. 
For collateral posted by a clearing member ADI to a QCCP, the ADI: 
(a) 
may apply a zero risk weight to all posted collateral that is held by a 
custodian where that collateral is bankruptcy remote from the QCCP;15,16 
and 
(b) 
must apply a two per cent risk weight to all posted collateral held by the 
QCCP where that collateral is not held in a bankruptcy remote manner.17 
28. 
For collateral posted by a client ADI to a QCCP, the ADI: 
(a) 
may apply a zero risk weight to all posted collateral that is held by a 
custodian where the collateral is bankruptcy remote from the QCCP, the 
clearing member, and the clearing member’s other clients; 
(b) 
must apply a two per cent risk weight to all posted collateral held by the 
QCCP if the collateral is not bankruptcy remote from the QCCP, and all 
conditions (a), (b) and (c) in paragraph 22 of this Attachment are satisfied; 
and 
(c) 
must apply a four per cent risk weight to all posted collateral held by the 
QCCP if the collateral is not bankruptcy remote from the QCCP and only 
conditions (a) and (c) in paragraph 22 of this Attachment are satisfied. 
                                                 
15  
A custodian may include a trustee, agent, pledgee, secured creditor or any other person that holds 
property in a way that does not give such person a beneficial interest in such property and will not 
result in such property being subject to legally-enforceable claims by such persons’ creditors, or 
to a court-ordered stay of the return of such property, if such person becomes insolvent or 
bankrupt. 
16  
For the avoidance of doubt, such collateral should not be included in the calculation of EAD under 
the SA-CCR 
17  
For the avoidance of doubt, such collateral should be included in the calculation of EAD under 
the SA-CCR. 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment B - 22 
Exposures arising from transactions cleared through a non-qualifying 
CCP 
29. 
For all transactions with a non-qualifying CCP, an ADI must calculate the 
following counterparty credit risk requirements: 
(a) 
trade exposure RWE in respect of the ADI’s trade exposure to the non-
qualifying CCP (including any exposure to the non-qualifying CCP that 
arises due to the ADI guaranteeing a client trade), calculated in accordance 
with Attachment A of this Prudential Standard, and risk weighted in 
accordance with Attachment A of APS 112;18 
(b) 
trade exposure RWE in respect of any exposure to the ADI’s clients, 
calculated in accordance with Attachment A of this Prudential Standard 
and: 
(i) 
for an IRB ADI, risk weighted in accordance with to APS 113;19 or 
(ii) 
for a standardised ADI, risk weighted in accordance with Attachment 
A of APS 112; 
(c) 
a CVA risk capital charge in respect of the non-qualifying CCP and any 
clients, calculated in accordance with Attachment A of this Prudential 
Standard; and 
(d) 
where the ADI is a clearing member of the non-qualifying CCP, default 
fund RWE, given by: 
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅= 1250% × 𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷 
where: 
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅= the clearing member ADI’s risk-weighted exposure (RWE) in 
respect of its default fund exposure to the non-qualifying CCP; and 
𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷= the clearing member ADI’s pre-funded contribution to the default 
fund of the non-qualifying CCP, plus a proportion, to be specified by 
APRA, of the ADI’s unfunded contributions that are liable to be paid should 
the CCP so require. 
Risk management requirements for centrally cleared exposures 
30. 
An ADI must establish a process for monitoring by, and regular reporting to, 
senior management of all of its exposures to CCPs, including exposures arising 
from trading through a CCP and exposures arising from CCP membership 
obligations such as default fund contributions. An ADI must also establish a 
                                                 
18  
An ADI must apply the standardised risk-weighting methodology of APS 112 regardless of 
whether the ADI has approval to use an internal ratings-based approach to credit risk under 
APS 113. 
19  
For the avoidance of doubt, an IRB ADI that has IRB approval for a portion of its exposures must 
determine the risk weights for exposures subject to the standardised approach to credit risk in 
accordance with APS 112, as required under APS 113. 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment B - 23 
process for regular reporting of material exposures to CCPs to the appropriate 
committee of the Board of directors (Board). 
31. 
An ADI must ensure that it maintains adequate capital for its exposures to CCPs, 
regardless of whether a CCP is classified as a QCCP. In particular, an ADI must 
consider whether it might need to hold capital in excess of the minimum capital 
requirements if, for example, (i) its dealings with a CCP give rise to higher risk 
exposure or (ii) where it is unclear whether a CCP meets the definition of a QCCP 
in paragraph 8(w) of this Prudential Standard based on the ADI’s dealings with 
the CCP. 
32. 
For all exposures to CCPs, a clearing member ADI must assess through 
appropriate scenario analysis and stress testing whether the level of capital held 
against exposures to a CCP adequately addresses the inherent risks of those 
transactions. The assessment must include potential future or contingent exposure 
resulting from future drawings on default fund commitments, and/or from any 
secondary commitments to take over or replace offsetting transactions from 
clients of another clearing member in the event that the clearing member defaults 
or becomes insolvent. 
33. 
Where a CCP is not based and prudentially supervised in a jurisdiction where the 
relevant regulator/overseer has publicly indicated that it applies domestic rules 
and regulations that are consistent with the CPMI-IOSCO Principles for 
Financial Market Infrastructures to the CCP on an ongoing basis, that CCP must 
be treated as a non-qualifying CCP unless APRA makes a determination that it 
may be treated as a QCCP. 
34. 
APRA may require an ADI to hold additional capital against its exposures to a 
QCCP if an external assessment has found material shortcomings in the 
regulation of the QCCP and the CCP regulator has not since publicly addressed 
the issues identified. 
Membership of CCPs 
35. 
A clearing member ADI must have an appropriate risk management framework 
to cover its activities as a clearing member. Such a framework must include, as a 
minimum: 
(a) 
assessment of the risk (financial, operational and reputational) that might 
arise from membership of and conduct of business through a CCP and from 
any similar engagement with multiple CCPs; 
(b) 
application of appropriate systems and controls to monitor, on a continuing 
basis, the risk that membership of and conduct of business through a CCP 
or multiple CCPs may create and to manage such risk. This would include 
application of limits on potential risk exposures; and 
(c) 
maintenance of appropriate capital cover against the risks that may arise 
from membership of and the conduct of business through a CCP and 
multiple CCPs. This would include capital cover relating to business 
conducted through the CCP and any funded support provided to a CCP or 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment B - 24 
any contingent support to which the ADI may be committed to provide to a 
CCP. 
36. 
Membership of a CCP must not expose an ADI to an unlimited contingent liability 
to support the CCP. 
37. 
An ADI must notify APRA prior to applying for membership of a CCP. 
38. 
An ADI that is a member of a CCP must notify APRA of any proposed changes 
to the contractual provisions or rules governing its membership and business 
undertaken through the CCP that may have the potential to impact on the level of 
exposure incurred from conducting business through the CCP or from any support 
that has to be provided (funded or unfunded) to the CCP. 
39. 
An ADI must notify APRA of any operational or financial risks arising from 
membership of and conduct of business through a CCP that may have a potential 
material adverse impact on the ADI’s operations, financial position or reputation. 
This would include any pertinent rulings, advice or actions by those entities 
responsible for the oversight or regulation of the conduct of business undertaken 
through the CCP or of membership of the CCP. 
 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment C - 25 
Attachment C — Capital charge for default fund 
exposure to a QCCP 
1. 
The default fund capital charge applies only to an ADI that is a clearing member 
to a QCCP. A client ADI is not required to calculate this capital charge. 
2. 
Where a default fund is shared between products or types of business with 
settlement risk only and products or types of business that give rise to 
counterparty credit risk (i.e. OTC derivative transactions, exchange-traded 
derivative transactions, SFTs or long settlement transactions), all of the default 
fund contributions will receive the risk weight determined according to the 
methodology outlined in paragraphs 3 to 15 of this Attachment, without 
apportioning to different classes or types of business or products under 
paragraph 3 of this Attachment. 
3. 
Where the default fund is segregated by product types and only accessible for 
specific product types, the capital charge for those default fund exposures must 
be calculated for each specific product giving rise to counterparty credit risk. 
4. 
When a QCCP’s pre-funded own resources are shared among product types, those 
funds must be allocated to each of the calculations in proportion to the respective 
product-specific EADs in the calculation of the ADI’s own default fund exposure 
to that QCCP. 
5. 
The default fund capital charge for a clearing member ADI’s default fund 
exposure is obtained by following a two-step process: 
(a) 
Step 1 - the calculation of a risk-sensitive measure of the exposure a QCCP 
has to all its clearing members and their clients (refer to paragraphs 7 to 14 
of this Attachment); and 
(b) 
Step 2 - the calculation of the default fund capital charge for the clearing 
member ADI (refer to paragraph 15 of this Attachment). 
6. 
A clearing member ADI may rely on the QCCP to undertake the calculations in 
paragraphs 7 to 14 of this Attachment and provide to the clearing member ADI 
the necessary data to calculate its default fund capital charge, provided any 
calculations undertaken by the QCCP meet the following conditions: 
(a) 
the QCCP’s calculations are undertaken in a transparent manner with 
sufficient shared information so as to permit: 
(i) 
a supervisor of the QCCP to oversee those calculations; 
(ii) 
the clearing member ADI to calculate the default fund capital charge 
on its own default fund contributions; and 
(iii) APRA to review and confirm such calculations upon request; 
(b) 
all calculations, including both steps and the inputs to both steps, must be 
repeated upon any material change (such as the QCCP clearing a new 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment C - 26 
product, or when there are material changes to the number of or the 
exposure of cleared transactions or material changes to the financial 
resources of the QCCP), and, in any case, at least quarterly. APRA may 
request a refreshed or more frequent recalculation at any time; and 
(c) 
sufficient aggregate information about the composition of the QCCP’s 
exposures to its clearing members, as well as any information20 provided to 
the ADI for calculation purposes, is made available to APRA at least 
quarterly, or upon request. 
Where any of these conditions are not met, an ADI must treat its default fund 
exposure as if it were to a non-qualifying CCP and calculate default fund RWE 
in accordance with Attachment B. 
7. 
Step 1 is to compute the hypothetical capital requirement of the QCCP, 𝐾𝐾𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶,21 
due to its counterparty credit risk exposures to all of its clearing members and 
their clients. 𝐾𝐾𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄 must be calculated according to: 
𝐾𝐾𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄= 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅× 8% × ෍𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐷𝐷𝑚𝑚
𝑚𝑚
 
where: 
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅= 20 per cent, except where APRA has determined that a higher risk weight 
must be used; and 
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐷𝐷𝑚𝑚= the exposure amount of the QCCP to the 𝑚𝑚𝑡𝑡ℎ clearing member, which 
must be calculated according to paragraphs 8 to 14 of this Attachment. 
In the circumstances where a CCP does not calculate and make available 𝐾𝐾𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄 
to a clearing member ADI but otherwise satisfies the definition of QCCP, the ADI 
must seek APRA’s approval for alternative arrangements for calculating its 
default fund capital charge. APRA may approve an application made under this 
paragraph. 
8. 
The exposure or the EAD amount must be calculated separately for derivative 
transactions and SFTs. The specific treatment depends on whether the clearing 
member provides client services and whether the client transactions and 
collaterals are held in separate sub-accounts to the clearing member’s house sub-
account. 
9. 
When a clearing member m provides client services to multiple clients (a client is 
denoted by 𝑐𝑐), and the client transactions and collaterals are held in separate 
(individual or omnibus) sub-accounts to clearing member 𝑚𝑚’s house sub-account 
for proprietary business, the exposure for clearing member 𝑚𝑚, 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐷𝐷𝑚𝑚, must be 
                                                 
20  
This includes the calculation for Step 1 and the CCP-level inputs used in Step 2. 
21  
𝐾𝐾𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 is calculated on a consistent basis for the sole purpose of determining the capital 
requirements of a clearing member’s default fund contribution. It does not represent the actual 
capital requirements of a QCCP. 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment C - 27 
calculated separately for each client sub-account and the house sub-account, 
according to: 
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐷𝐷𝑚𝑚= 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑚𝑚
derivatives + 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐷𝐷𝑚𝑚
SFTs + ෍൫𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐷𝐷𝑚𝑚,𝑐𝑐
derivatives + 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐷𝐷𝑚𝑚,𝑐𝑐
SFTs൯
𝑐𝑐
 
where: 
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐷𝐷𝑚𝑚
TYPE = the EAD of the QCCP to clearing member 𝑚𝑚’s house sub-account 
for a given type of transaction; and 
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐷𝐷𝑚𝑚,𝑐𝑐
TYPE = the EAD of the QCCP to client 𝑐𝑐’s sub-account for a given type of 
transaction. 
10. 
When a clearing member 𝑚𝑚 provides client services and those client transactions 
and collateral are not held in separate sub-accounts to the clearing member’s 
house sub-account, then the exposure of m and all of its clients must be calculated 
together, according to: 
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐷𝐷𝑚𝑚= 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐷𝐷𝑚𝑚,∑𝑐𝑐
derivatives + 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐷𝐷𝑚𝑚,∑𝑐𝑐
SFT  
where: 
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐷𝐷𝑚𝑚,∑𝑐𝑐
TYPE = the EAD of the QCCP to both clearing member 𝑚𝑚’s house sub-
account, and all of its clients’ sub-accounts for a given type of transaction. 
11. 
Where a clearing member 𝑚𝑚 does not provide any client services, 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐷𝐷𝑚𝑚 must be 
calculated simply as: 
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐷𝐷𝑚𝑚=  𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐷𝐷𝑚𝑚
derivatives + 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐷𝐷𝑚𝑚
SFT 
where: 
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐷𝐷𝑚𝑚
TYPE = the EAD of the QCCP to clearing member 𝑚𝑚’s house sub-account 
for a given type of transaction. 
12. 
In calculating each sub account-level EAD amount the following three conditions 
must be satisfied: 
(a) 
the netting sets that are applicable to regulated clearing members (and their 
clients) of the QCCP must be the same as those referred to in paragraphs 13 
and 14 of Attachment B. All other clearing members (and their clients) of 
the QCCP must otherwise follow the netting rules as laid out by the QCCP 
based upon notification of each of its clearing members. Where APRA is 
not satisfied with these netting rules, APRA may request an ADI to ensure 
that more granular netting sets than as laid out by the QCCP are used in the 
calculation; 
(b) 
if the default fund contributions of the clearing member of the QCCP are 
not split with regard to client and house sub-accounts, these default fund 
contributions must each be allocated per sub-account according to the 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment C - 28 
respective fraction the initial margin of that sub-margin has in relation to 
the total initial margin posted by or for the account of the clearing member; 
and 
(c) 
within each sub-account (of both the client and the house), the pre-funded 
initial margin provided by the clearing member or client, as well as the 
default fund contribution provided by the clearing member or apportioned 
to the client, must be allocated to the derivative and SFT exposures in 
proportion to the respective product specific EADs, calculated in 
accordance with the SA-CCR methodology without including the effects of 
collateral for derivative transactions; or as the exposure value under 
paragraph 26 of Attachment I of APS 112 for SFTs. 
13. 
For derivative transactions, each sub account-level EAD must be calculated as 
the bilateral trade exposure the QCCP has against the clearing member ADI or 
client ADI using the SA-CCR methodology and is subject to the following two 
requirements: 
(a) 
all collateral22 held by the QCCP to which it has a legal claim in the event 
of the default of the member or client, must be used to offset the QCCP’s 
EAD to that member or client through inclusion in the potential future 
exposure (PFE) multiplier in accordance with paragraph 14 of 
Attachment D of this Prudential Standard; and 
(b) 
a MPOR of 10 business days must be used for the calculation of the EAD.23 
14. 
For SFTs, each sub account-level EAD amount must be calculated according to 
the following formula: 
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖
SFT = max{𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖−𝐼𝐼𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖−𝐷𝐷𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖; 0} 
where: 
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖
SFT = the EAD amount of the QCCP to the SFT exposure originated from 
party24 𝑖𝑖; 
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖= the exposure value of the SFTs that a QCCP has against party 𝑖𝑖 before 
risk mitigation under paragraphs 26 and 27 of Attachment I of APS 112. The 
mark-to-market value of the SFTs must incorporate the variation margin that has 
been exchanged before the margin called on the final margin call of the 
calculation date; 
𝐼𝐼𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖= initial margin allocated to SFT exposures posted by party 𝑖𝑖 with the QCCP; 
and 
                                                 
22  
This collateral includes initial margin, default fund contribution, variation margin, over-
collateralisation, and the collateral posted by clients as specified in paragraph 15 of Attachment B. 
23  
The 20-business day floor outlined in paragraph 40(a) of Attachment G of APS 112 does not apply 
to this case. 
24  
A party can either be a clearing member or a client. 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment C - 29 
𝐷𝐷𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖= the pre-funded default fund contribution allocated to the SFT exposure by 
party 𝑖𝑖, that will be applied upon the default of 𝑖𝑖 if 𝑖𝑖 is a clearing member, or of 
𝑖𝑖’s clearing member if 𝑖𝑖 is a client, either along with or immediately following 
the posted initial margin to reduce the QCCP’s loss. 
In calculating 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖
SFT, the minimum holding period used in the bilateral case for 
SFTs outlined in paragraph 39 of Attachment G of APS 112 must be applied.25 
15. 
Step 2 is to compute the default fund capital charge for an ADI, 𝐾𝐾𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴, as a fraction 
of 𝐾𝐾𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄. The capital charge for an ADI (𝐾𝐾𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴) is subject to a floor of 0.16 per 
cent (corresponding to a default fund exposure risk weight of two per cent) on an 
ADI pre-funded default fund contribution. 𝐾𝐾𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴 is determined by the ratio of the 
ADI’s pre-funded default fund contribution to the total of all pre-funded resources 
and contributions from the QCCP itself and all of its clearing members, according 
to: 
𝐾𝐾𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴= max ൜𝐾𝐾𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄× ൬
𝐷𝐷𝐹𝐹𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴
𝐷𝐷𝐹𝐹𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶+ 𝐷𝐷𝐹𝐹𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶
൰; 0.16% × 𝐷𝐷𝐹𝐹𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴ൠ 
where: 
𝐷𝐷𝐹𝐹𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴= the pre-funded default fund contributions provided by the ADI; 
𝐷𝐷𝐹𝐹𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶= the total pre-funded default fund contributions from all clearing 
members of the QCCP; and 
𝐷𝐷𝐹𝐹𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶= the QCCP’s pre-funded own resources which are contributed to the 
default waterfall, where these are junior or pari passu to pre-funded member 
contributions. 
 
                                                 
25  
See footnote 23. 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment D - 30 
Attachment D — The standardised approach for 
measuring counterparty credit risk exposures (SA-
CCR) 
1. 
This Attachment applies to an IRB ADI. The SA-CCR applies to OTC derivative 
transactions, exchange-traded derivative transactions and long settlement 
transactions. For the purposes of this Attachment, a long settlement transaction 
must be treated as an OTC derivative transaction. The SA-CCR does not apply to 
SFTs. 
2. 
The SA-CCR must be used for bilateral and centrally-cleared derivative 
transactions. The SA-CCR must be used for both margined26 and unmargined27 
derivative transactions. 
Exposure at default (EAD)  
3. 
To calculate EAD for: 
(a) 
unmargined transactions, apply the treatment in paragraphs 4 to 49 of this 
Attachment; 
(b) 
margined transactions where the set of transactions under a margin 
agreement and within the netting set coincide, apply the treatment in 
paragraphs 4 to 49 of this Attachment; 
(c) 
margined transactions where the set of transactions under a margin 
agreement and within the netting set differ, apply the treatment in 
paragraphs 50 to 52 of this Attachment; and 
(d) 
transactions where eligible collateral is taken outside of netting sets but is 
available to offset default losses, apply the treatment in paragraph 53 of this 
Attachment. 
4. 
The EAD for all derivative transactions with a counterparty must be calculated as 
the sum of the EAD for each netting set with the counterparty. The EAD for a 
netting set must be calculated as: 
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸= 1.4 × (𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅+ 𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃) 
where 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 is the replacement cost (refer to paragraphs 8 to 10 of this Attachment) 
and 𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 is the potential future exposure (refer to paragraphs 12 to 49 of this 
Attachment). 
5. 
Bilateral transactions must be treated as margined where a transaction is subject 
to exchange of variation margin. Bilateral transactions with a one-way margining 
                                                 
26  
Transactions are considered to be margined where there is exchange of variation margin. Other 
forms of collateral may also exist. 
27  
Transactions are considered unmargined in the case that there is no exchange of variation margin, 
but collaterals other than VM such as in the form of independent collateral amount (ICA) may 
exist. 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment D - 31 
agreement in favour of an ADI’s counterparty (that is, where an ADI posts, but 
does not collect, variation margin) must be treated as unmargined transactions. 
Centrally cleared transactions must be treated as either margined or unmargined 
transactions in accordance with the treatment adopted under paragraph 6 of 
Attachment B of this Prudential Standard. 
6. 
The maximum EAD for a margined netting set is the EAD of the same netting set 
calculated as if it were unmargined. 
7. 
An ADI may set EAD to zero for sold options that are: 
(a) 
 not in any netting or margining agreements; or 
(b) 
the only types of exposures in a netting set, 
where all premiums have been paid upfront. 
Replacement cost (RC) 
8. 
The RC must be calculated for each netting set according to: 
(a) 
paragraph 9 for a netting set of unmargined transactions; or 
(b) 
paragraph 10 for a netting set of margined transactions. 
RC for an unmargined netting set 
9. 
For an unmargined netting set, the RC must be calculated as: 
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅= max{𝑉𝑉−𝐶𝐶𝐻𝐻(1 year), 0} 
where: 
𝑉𝑉= the total current market value of all the derivative transactions within the 
netting set; and 
𝐶𝐶𝐻𝐻(1 year) = the haircut value of net collateral held by the ADI calculated in 
accordance with paragraph 11 of this Attachment, with a holding period of one 
year. 
RC for a margined netting set 
10. 
For a margined netting set, the RC must be calculated as: 
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅= max{𝑉𝑉−𝐶𝐶𝐻𝐻(MPOR), 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇+ 𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀−𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁, 0} 
where: 
𝑉𝑉= the total current market value of all the derivative transactions within the 
netting set; 
MPOR = the margin period of risk as defined in paragraph 8(o) of this Prudential 
Standard; 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment D - 32 
𝐶𝐶𝐻𝐻(MPOR) = the haircut value of net collateral held by the ADI calculated in 
accordance with paragraph 11 of this Attachment, with a holding period equal to 
the MPOR; 
𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇= the positive threshold above which the counterparty must send the ADI 
collateral as specified in the margin agreement; 
𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀= the minimum transfer amount applicable to the counterparty as specified 
in the margin agreement; and 
𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁= the net independent collateral amount. 
11. 
The following haircut formula must be applied to the current value of the net 
collateral (C) held by an ADI within the RC calculation for both the margined 
and unmargined cases: 
𝐶𝐶𝐻𝐻(𝑡𝑡) = ൜𝐶𝐶× (1 −𝐻𝐻(𝑡𝑡)),  if 𝐶𝐶≥0
𝐶𝐶× (1 + 𝐻𝐻(𝑡𝑡)),  if 𝐶𝐶< 0 
where: 
𝐶𝐶 = the current mark-to-market value of the net collateral held by an ADI. This 
includes all initial and variation margin posted and held by the ADI except for 
collateral posted by the ADI in a bankruptcy remote manner; 
𝐶𝐶𝐻𝐻(𝑡𝑡) = the haircut value of net collateral held; 
𝑡𝑡 = the holding period applicable to the collateral; and 
𝐻𝐻(𝑡𝑡) = the haircut appropriate to the collateral using a holding period of 𝑡𝑡, 
determined in accordance with paragraphs 30 to 48 of Attachment G of APS 112 
(including FX haircuts). 
Potential future exposure (PFE) 
12. 
The PFE for a netting set is determined by the aggregated PFE add-on factors for 
each asset class within a given netting set and a multiplier allowing partial 
recognition of excess collateral. The five asset classes are interest rate, foreign 
exchange, credit, equity and commodity. 
13. 
An ADI must either assign each transaction to one of the five asset classes based 
on the single risk factor referenced by its underlying instrument, or, where a 
transaction is exposed to multiple risk factors referencing multiple asset classes, 
an ADI must follow the approach set out in paragraph 20 of this Attachment. 
14. 
The PFE must be calculated as: 
𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃= 𝑚𝑚× 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑛𝑛𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 
with 𝑚𝑚 and 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑛𝑛𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 calculated as: 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment D - 33 
𝑚𝑚= min ቊ0.05 + 0.95 × 𝑒𝑒
൬
𝑉𝑉−𝐶𝐶𝐻𝐻(⋅)
1.9×𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑛𝑛𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎൰, 1ቋ  
𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑛𝑛𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎= ෍𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑛𝑛𝑎𝑎
𝑎𝑎∈𝐴𝐴
 
where: 
𝑚𝑚= the multiplier that allows for the recognition of over-collateralisation or 
negative mark-to-market value of the transactions. 𝑚𝑚 decreases to a minimum 
value of five per cent as excess collateral increases; 
𝑉𝑉= the total current market value of all the derivative transactions within the 
netting set; 
CH(⋅) = 𝐶𝐶𝐻𝐻(1 year) for unmargined transactions and 𝐶𝐶𝐻𝐻(MPOR) for margined 
transactions (refer to paragraphs 9 and 10 of this Attachment, respectively); 
𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑛𝑛𝑎𝑎= the add-on factor for asset class 𝑎𝑎; and 
𝐴𝐴= the set containing all asset classes (interest rate, foreign exchange, credit, 
equity and commodity). 
15. 
For each asset class 𝑎𝑎, the add-on factor 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑛𝑛𝑎𝑎 must be calculated as the sum 
of all hedging set level (𝑗𝑗)28 add-ons within asset class 𝑎𝑎: 
𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑛𝑛𝑎𝑎= ෍𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑗𝑗
𝑎𝑎
𝑗𝑗
 
where: 
𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑗𝑗
𝑎𝑎=  the positive add-on factor for hedging set 𝑗𝑗 within asset class 𝑎𝑎. 
16. 
The definition of a hedging set for each asset class is provided in paragraph 19 of 
this Attachment. Treatment of basis and volatility transactions is provided in 
paragraph 17 of this Attachment. The calculation of the add-on factor for a 
hedging set within each asset class is defined in the following paragraphs of this 
Attachment: 
(a) 
interest rate asset class, paragraphs 22 to 25; 
(b) 
foreign exchange asset class, paragraphs 26 to 28; 
(c) 
credit asset class, paragraphs 29 to 33; 
                                                 
28  
In each of the asset class sections below, the following subscripts are used to describe the different 
levels within the SA-CCR framework (from lowest to highest): 𝑖𝑖 represents an individual 
derivatives transaction, 𝑘𝑘 represents a category within a hedging set,  𝑗𝑗 represents a hedging set 
within an asset class. 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment D - 34 
(d) 
equity asset class, paragraphs 34 to 37; and 
(e) 
commodity asset class, paragraphs 38 to 41. 
17. 
Within each asset class, basis and volatility transactions must form separate 
hedging sets: 
(a) 
A basis transaction is a non-foreign exchange transaction (i.e. both legs are 
denominated in the same currency) in which the cash flows of both legs 
depend on different risk factors from the same asset class.29 A separate 
hedging set30 must be used for each basis risk (i.e. for each specific pair of 
risk factors). For a hedging set consisting of basis transactions: 
(i) 
the same hedging set category definition must be applied given the 
particular asset class (refer to paragraph 19 of this Attachment); and 
(ii) 
the supervisory factor (𝑆𝑆𝐹𝐹𝑎𝑎) applicable to a given asset class  𝑎𝑎 as 
defined in paragraph 21 of this Attachment must be multiplied by 
one-half. 
(b) 
A volatility transaction is one in which the reference asset depends on the 
volatility (historical or implied) of a risk factor. For a hedging set consisting 
of volatility transactions: 
(i) 
the same hedging set category definition must be applied given the 
particular asset class (refer to paragraph 19 of this Attachment); and 
(ii) 
the supervisory factor (𝑆𝑆𝐹𝐹𝑎𝑎) applicable to a given asset class 𝑎𝑎 as 
defined in paragraph 21 of this Attachment must be multiplied by 
five. 
18. 
Aggregation of the add-on factors for basis and volatility hedging sets with those 
from other hedging sets within the same asset class must be performed according 
to the hedging set aggregation rule set out in paragraph 15 of this Attachment. 
19. 
No offsetting is permitted across different hedging sets. Partial or full offsetting 
may be permitted within a single hedging set.31 Permitted offsetting varies based 
on the particular asset class as summarised in Table 2.32 
 
                                                 
29  
Derivative transactions with two floating legs that are denominated in different currencies (such 
as cross-currency swaps) must be treated as non-basis foreign exchange contracts. 
30  
Within this hedging set, long and short positions must be determined with respect to the basis. 
31  
A hedging set 𝑗𝑗 within the asset class 𝑎𝑎 represents one of the following three cases: (1) the core 
hedging set for the credit or equity class, or; (2) one of the hedging sets defined within the interest 
rate, foreign exchange or commodity class; or (3) one of the hedging sets defined for the basis or 
volatility transactions within asset class 𝑎𝑎. 
32  
Note, basis and volatility hedging sets follow the same hedging set aggregation rules for the 
relevant asset class. 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment D - 35 
Table 2: Definition of hedging sets and categories, and permitted offsetting within 
a single hedging set for each asset class 
Asset class 
Definition of hedging sets 
and categories 
Permitted offsetting within 
a single hedging set 
Interest rate 
A separate hedging set must 
be established for all 
transactions that reference 
interest rates of the same 
currency. 
Each hedging set is further 
divided into three separate 
maturity categories. 
Full offsetting is permitted in 
the same maturity category 
within each hedging set. 
Partial offsetting may be 
recognised across different 
maturity categories within 
each hedging set. 
Foreign 
exchange 
A separate hedging set must 
be established for each 
currency pair. 
No categories are defined 
within a hedging set. 
Full offsetting is permitted 
within each hedging set. 
Credit 
All transactions form a single 
core hedging set. 
The hedging set is further 
divided into separate 
categories for each reference 
entity, either single name or 
index. 
Full offsetting is permitted 
within the same reference 
entity category within each 
hedging set. 
Partial offsetting may be 
recognised across different 
reference entity categories 
within each hedging set. 
Equity 
All transactions form a single 
core hedging set. 
The hedging set is further 
divided into separate 
categories for each reference 
entity, either single name or 
index. 
Full offsetting is permitted 
within the same reference 
entity category within each 
hedging set. 
Partial offsetting may be 
recognised across different 
reference entity categories 
within each hedging set. 
Commodity 
A separate hedging set must 
be established for each of 
four broad groups of 
commodities: 
• energy;33 
• metals;34 
• agricultural; and  
• other commodities. 
Full offsetting is permitted in 
the same commodity type 
category within each hedging 
set. 
Partial offsetting may be 
recognised across different 
commodity type categories 
within each hedging set. 
                                                 
33  
Consists of both electricity and oil/gas. 
34  
Includes gold and other precious metals. 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment D - 36 
Each hedging set is further 
divided into separate ADI-
defined categories based on 
commodity type. 
 
Allocation of a transaction to one or more asset classes 
20. 
An ADI must treat transactions with multiple risk factors in a consistent manner. 
When a transaction is exposed to multiple risk factors referencing multiple asset 
classes (e.g. multi-asset or hybrid derivative transactions), an ADI must: 
(a) 
measure and record the sensitivities and volatilities of each risk factor of 
that transaction; 
(b) 
repeat the process at regular intervals or when substantial market 
movements take place; and 
(c) 
assign the transaction to: 
(i) 
a single asset class where the ADI has determined that the transaction 
has a primary risk factor that is the clear main driver of profit and loss 
(P&L) volatility based on sensitivities and risk factor volatilities; or 
(ii) 
all applicable asset classes where the transaction does not have a 
primary risk factor and multiple risk factors are significant drivers of 
P&L volatility based on sensitivities and risk factor volatilities, 
except where APRA has granted approval to assign the transaction to 
a single asset class. 
Definition and notation of key parameters 
21. 
An ADI must use the definitions in Table 3 and paragraphs 42 to 49 of this 
Attachment when calculating the PFE add-ons. Transaction-level parameters are 
denoted with subscript 𝑖𝑖 representing transaction 𝑖𝑖.35 
Table 3: Definition of transaction-level and supervisory parameters 
Symbol 
Parameter 
Definition 
𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑖
𝑎𝑎 
Adjusted notional 
amount  
(refer to paragraph 
42) 
The transaction-level adjusted notional 
amount for transaction 𝑖𝑖 belonging to asset 
class 𝑎𝑎. 
𝑀𝑀𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖 
Maturity factor  
A multiplier used in determining the 
effective notional amount for transaction 𝑖𝑖. 
The maturity factor is calculated differently 
for margined and unmargined transactions. 
                                                 
35  
For guidance, an ADI may refer to examples of maturity dates, start dates and end dates for various 
transactions published by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment D - 37 
Symbol 
Parameter 
Definition 
(refer to paragraph 
48) 
𝛿𝛿𝑖𝑖 
Supervisory delta 
adjustment 
(refer to paragraphs 
43 to 47) 
A transaction-level supervisory delta 
adjustment reflecting the direction and non-
linearity of transaction 𝑖𝑖. 
𝜌𝜌𝑎𝑎 
Supervisory 
correlation 
parameter 
(refer to paragraph 
49) 
A supervisory parameter specifying the 
weight between systematic and 
idiosyncratic components in the one-factor 
model used in the credit, equity and 
commodity asset classes only. 
𝑆𝑆𝐹𝐹𝑎𝑎 
Supervisory factor 
(refer to paragraph 
49) 
A factor or factors specific to each asset 
class used to convert the effective notional 
amount into Effective expected positive 
exposure (Effective EPE) based on the 
measured volatility of the asset class. 
𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖 
Maturity date 
The time interval between the calculation 
date (today) and the latest date when 
transaction 𝑖𝑖 may still be active, measured 
in years. If transaction 𝑖𝑖 has another 
derivative contract as its underlying (e.g. a 
swaption) and may be physically exercised 
into the underlying contract (i.e. an ADI 
would assume a position in the underlying 
contract in the event of exercise), then 𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖 
must be set as the time interval between the 
calculation date and the final settlement 
date of the underlying derivative contract. 
𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖 
Start date 
The time interval between the calculation 
date (today) and the start date of the time 
period referenced by transaction 𝑖𝑖, 
measured in years. The time period 
referenced by transaction 𝑖𝑖 is subject to a 
floor of 10 business days. If the start date 
has occurred (e.g. an ongoing interest rate 
swap), 𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖 must be set to zero. If transaction 
𝑖𝑖 references the value of another interest 
rate or credit instrument (e.g. a swaption or 
bond option), the time period must be 
determined on the basis of the underlying 
instrument. This parameter, 𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖, applies only 
to interest rate and credit transactions.  
𝐸𝐸𝑖𝑖 
End date 
The time interval between the calculation 
date (today) and the end date of the time 
period referenced by transaction 𝑖𝑖, 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment D - 38 
Symbol 
Parameter 
Definition 
measured in years. The time period 
referenced by transaction 𝑖𝑖 is subject to a 
floor of 10 business days. If the start date 
has occurred (e.g. an ongoing interest rate 
swap), 𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖 must be set to zero. If transaction 
𝑖𝑖 references the value of another interest 
rate or credit instrument (e.g. a swaption or 
bond option), the time period must be 
determined on the basis of the underlying 
instrument. This parameter, 𝐸𝐸𝑖𝑖, applies only 
to interest rate and credit transactions. 
 
Add-on for interest rate derivative transactions 
22. 
For the interest rate asset class, within each hedging set (refer to paragraph 19 of 
this Attachment), transactions must be divided into three maturity categories 
based on the end date of the transaction: less than one year (𝑘𝑘= 1), between one 
to five years ( 𝑘𝑘= 2) and more than five years (𝑘𝑘= 3). 
23. 
For the interest rate asset class, the add-on for each hedging set 𝑗𝑗, 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑗𝑗
𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼, must 
be calculated as: 
𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑗𝑗
𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼= 𝑆𝑆𝐹𝐹𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼× 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑙𝑙𝑗𝑗
𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 
where: 
𝑆𝑆𝐹𝐹𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼= the supervisory factor for the interest rate asset class (refer to paragraph 
49); and 
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑙𝑙𝑗𝑗
𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼= the hedging set level (𝑗𝑗) effective notional amount 
defined in paragraph 24 of this Attachment. 
24. 
The effective notional amount for hedging set 𝑗𝑗, 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑙𝑙𝑗𝑗
𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼, is the 
aggregate effective notional amounts across the three maturity categories. An 
ADI must aggregate the three category-level (𝑘𝑘) effective notional amounts using 
the following formula where partial offsetting is recognised: 
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑙𝑙𝑗𝑗
𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 
= ඩቌ
෍
൫𝐷𝐷𝑗𝑗,𝑘𝑘
𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼൯
2
𝑘𝑘∈{1,2,3}
ቍ+ 1.4 × 𝐷𝐷𝑗𝑗,1
𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼× 𝐷𝐷𝑗𝑗,2
𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼+ 1.4 × 𝐷𝐷𝑗𝑗,2
𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼× 𝐷𝐷𝑗𝑗,3
𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼+ 0.6 × 𝐷𝐷𝑗𝑗,1
𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼× 𝐷𝐷𝑗𝑗,3
𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 
Alternatively, an ADI may elect to not recognise any offsetting across maturity 
categories in which case the formula to be used is:  
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑙𝑙𝑗𝑗
𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼=
෍
ห𝐷𝐷𝑗𝑗,𝑘𝑘
𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼ห
𝑘𝑘∈{1,2,3}
 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment D - 39 
where 𝐷𝐷𝑗𝑗,𝑘𝑘
𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼= the effective notional amount for category 𝑘𝑘, defined in 
paragraph 25 of this Attachment. 
25. 
The effective notional amount for category 𝑘𝑘, denoted by 𝐷𝐷𝑗𝑗,𝑘𝑘
𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼, must be calculated 
as the sum of all individual transaction level (𝑖𝑖) quantities, according to: 
𝐷𝐷𝑗𝑗,𝑘𝑘
𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼=
෍𝛿𝛿𝑖𝑖×
𝑖𝑖∈𝐼𝐼(𝑗𝑗,𝑘𝑘)
𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑖
𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼× 𝑀𝑀𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖 
where: 
𝐼𝐼(𝑗𝑗, 𝑘𝑘) = the set of all interest rate transactions belonging to maturity category 𝑘𝑘 
and hedging set 𝑗𝑗; 
𝛿𝛿𝑖𝑖= the supervisory delta adjustment for transaction 𝑖𝑖, calculated according to 
paragraphs 43 to 47 of this Attachment; 
𝑀𝑀𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖= the maturity factor for transaction 𝑖𝑖, calculated according to paragraph 48 
of this Attachment; and 
𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑖
𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼= the adjusted notional amount for transaction 𝑖𝑖, and must be calculated as: 
𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑖
𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼= 𝑁𝑁𝑖𝑖× ቆ𝑒𝑒−0.05𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖−𝑒𝑒−0.05𝐸𝐸𝑖𝑖
0.05
ቇ 
where: 
𝑁𝑁𝑖𝑖= the notional amount of transaction 𝑖𝑖, converted to AUD, using the 
exchange rate on the calculation date. The parameter 𝑁𝑁𝑖𝑖 is also subject to 
the requirements in paragraph 42 of this Attachment; 
𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖= the start date for transaction 𝑖𝑖; and 
𝐸𝐸𝑖𝑖= the end date for transaction 𝑖𝑖. 
Add-on for foreign exchange derivative transactions 
26. 
For the foreign exchange asset class, hedging sets must be constructed according 
to paragraph 19 of this Attachment. 
27. 
The add-on for each hedging set 𝑗𝑗, 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑗𝑗
𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹, must be calculated as: 
𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑗𝑗
𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹= 𝑆𝑆𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹× ห𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑙𝑙𝑗𝑗
𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹ห 
where: 
𝑆𝑆𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹= the supervisory factor for the foreign exchange asset class (refer to 
paragraph 49 of this Attachment); and 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment D - 40 
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑙𝑙𝑗𝑗
𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹=  effective notional amount for hedging set 𝑗𝑗, calculated 
according to paragraph 28 of this Attachment. 
28. 
The 
effective 
notional 
amount 
for 
hedging 
set 
𝑗𝑗, 
denoted 
by 
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑗𝑗
𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹, must be calculated as the sum of all individual 
transaction level (𝑖𝑖) quantities, according to: 
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑗𝑗
𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹= ෍𝛿𝛿𝑖𝑖×
𝑖𝑖∈𝐼𝐼(𝑗𝑗)
𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑖
𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹× 𝑀𝑀𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖 
where: 
𝐼𝐼(𝑗𝑗) = the set of all foreign exchange transactions belonging to hedging set 𝑗𝑗; 
𝛿𝛿𝑖𝑖= the supervisory delta adjustment for transaction 𝑖𝑖, calculated according to 
paragraphs 43 to 47 of this Attachment; 
𝑀𝑀𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖= the maturity factor for transaction 𝑖𝑖, calculated according to paragraph 48 
of this Attachment; and 
𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑖
𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹= the adjusted notional amount for transaction 𝑖𝑖. It must be set as the notional 
of the foreign currency leg of transaction 𝑖𝑖, converted to AUD using the exchange 
rate on the calculation date. If both legs are denominated in currencies other than 
AUD, the notional amount of each leg must first be converted to AUD using the 
exchange rate on the calculation date and 𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑖
𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹 must be set as the leg with the 
larger AUD value. The adjusted notional amount is also subject to the 
requirements in paragraph 42 of this Attachment. 
Add-on for credit derivative transactions 
29. 
With the exception of separate hedging sets for basis and volatility transactions, 
a single core hedging set must be used for all credit derivative transactions. 
Within the core hedging set (refer to paragraph 19 of this Attachment), 
transactions must be further divided into different categories, with each category 
(𝑘𝑘) containing all the transactions referencing the same entity 𝑘𝑘. Each single name 
entity or index is a separate category. 
30. 
The add-on factor for the single core hedging set for the credit asset class, 
𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐶𝐶𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶
, must be calculated as: 
𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶
= ඩ൥෍൫𝜌𝜌𝑘𝑘
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶× 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶,𝑘𝑘
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶
൯
𝑘𝑘
൩
2
+ ෍ቄ[1 −(𝜌𝜌𝑘𝑘
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶)2] × ൫𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶,𝑘𝑘
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶
൯
2ቅ
𝑘𝑘
 
where: 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment D - 41 
𝜌𝜌𝑘𝑘
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶= the supervisory correlation parameter for category 𝑘𝑘. An ADI must 
determine 𝜌𝜌𝑘𝑘
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 depending on whether 𝑘𝑘 is a single name or index entity according 
to paragraph 49 of this Attachment; and 
𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶,𝑘𝑘
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶
= the add-on factor for category 𝑘𝑘, calculated according to 
paragraph 31 of this Attachment. 
31. 
The add-on factor for category 𝑘𝑘, 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶,𝑘𝑘
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶
, must be calculated as: 
𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶,𝑘𝑘
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶
= 𝑆𝑆𝐹𝐹𝑘𝑘
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶× 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑙𝑙𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶,𝑘𝑘
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶
 
where: 
𝑆𝑆𝐹𝐹𝑘𝑘
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶= the supervisory factor for the rating class of category 𝑘𝑘 (i.e. reference 
entity 𝑘𝑘) determined according to paragraph 49 of this Attachment; and 
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶,𝑘𝑘
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶
= the category-level (𝑘𝑘) effective notional amount, 
calculated according to paragraph 32. 
32. 
The effective notional amount for category 𝑘𝑘, 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶,𝑘𝑘
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶
, must 
be calculated as the sum of all individual transaction level (𝑖𝑖) quantities, 
according to: 
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶,𝑘𝑘
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶
=
෍
𝛿𝛿𝑖𝑖×
𝑖𝑖∈𝐼𝐼(𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶,𝑘𝑘)
𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑖
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶× 𝑀𝑀𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖 
where: 
𝐼𝐼(𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶, 𝑘𝑘) = the set of all transactions belonging to category 𝑘𝑘 (i.e. reference 
entity 𝑘𝑘) within the core credit hedging set; 
𝛿𝛿𝑖𝑖= the supervisory delta adjustment for transaction 𝑖𝑖, calculated according to 
paragraphs 43 to 47 of this Attachment; 
𝑀𝑀𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖= the maturity factor for transaction 𝑖𝑖, calculated according to paragraph 48 
of this Attachment; and 
𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑖
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶= the adjusted notional amount for transaction 𝑖𝑖, calculated as: 
𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑖
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶= 𝑁𝑁𝑖𝑖× ቆ𝑒𝑒−0.05𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖−𝑒𝑒−0.05𝐸𝐸𝑖𝑖
0.05
ቇ 
where: 
𝑁𝑁𝑖𝑖 is the notional amount of transaction 𝑖𝑖, converted to AUD, using the 
exchange rate on the calculation date. The parameter 𝑁𝑁𝑖𝑖 is also subject to 
the requirements in paragraph 42 of this Attachment; 
𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖 is the start date for transaction 𝑖𝑖; and 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment D - 42 
𝐸𝐸𝑖𝑖 is the end date for transaction 𝑖𝑖. 
33. 
For transaction 𝑖𝑖, where an ADI is the credit protection seller and the transaction 
is not in any netting or margin agreements, the ADI may cap the EAD to the 
amount of unpaid premiums. An ADI may also remove a transaction from its 
netting set where it is the credit protection seller and treat the transaction as an 
individual unmargined transaction in order to apply the cap. 
Add-on for equity derivative transactions 
34. 
With the exception of separate hedging sets for basis and volatility transactions, 
a single core hedging set must be used for all equity derivative transactions. 
Within the core hedging set (refer to paragraph 19 of this Attachment), 
transactions must be further divided into categories, with each category (𝑘𝑘) 
containing all the transactions referencing the same entity 𝑘𝑘. Each single name 
entity or index is a separate category. 
35. 
The add-on factor for the single core hedging set for the equity asset class, 
𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸
, must be calculated as: 
𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸
= ඩ൥෍൫𝜌𝜌𝑘𝑘
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸× 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶,𝑘𝑘
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸
൯
𝑘𝑘
൩
2
+ ෍ቄቂ1 −൫𝜌𝜌𝑘𝑘
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸൯
2ቃ× ൫𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶,𝑘𝑘
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸
൯
2ቅ
𝑘𝑘
 
where: 
𝜌𝜌𝑘𝑘
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸= the supervisory correlation parameter for category 𝑘𝑘. An ADI must 
determine 𝜌𝜌𝑘𝑘
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸 depending on whether 𝑘𝑘 is a single name or index entity, according 
to paragraph 49 of this Attachment; and 
𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶,𝑘𝑘
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸
= the add-on factor for category 𝑘𝑘, calculated according to 
paragraph 36 of this Attachment. 
36. 
The add-on factor for category 𝑘𝑘, 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶,𝑘𝑘
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸
, must be calculated as: 
𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶,𝑘𝑘
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸
= 𝑆𝑆𝐹𝐹𝑘𝑘
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸× 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑙𝑙𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶,𝑘𝑘
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸
 
where: 
𝑆𝑆𝐹𝐹𝑘𝑘
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸= the supervisory factor for category 𝑘𝑘 determined according to 
paragraph 49 of this Attachment; and 
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶,𝑘𝑘
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸
= the category-level (𝑘𝑘) effective notional amount, 
calculated according to paragraph 37 of this Attachment. 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment D - 43 
37. 
The 
effective 
notional 
amount 
for 
category 
𝑘𝑘, 
denoted 
by 
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶,𝑘𝑘
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸
, must be calculated as the sum of all individual 
transaction level (𝑖𝑖) quantities, according to: 
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶,𝑘𝑘
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸
=
෍
𝛿𝛿𝑖𝑖×
𝑖𝑖∈𝐼𝐼(𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶,𝑘𝑘)
𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑖
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸× 𝑀𝑀𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖 
where: 
𝐼𝐼(𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶, 𝑘𝑘) = the set of all transactions belonging to category 𝑘𝑘 (i.e. reference 
entity 𝑘𝑘) within the core equity hedging set; 
𝛿𝛿𝑖𝑖= the supervisory delta adjustment for transaction 𝑖𝑖, calculated according to 
paragraphs 43 to 47; 
𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑖
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸= the adjusted notional amount for transaction 𝑖𝑖, and must be calculated as 
the product of the current price of one unit of the stock and the number of units 
referenced by transaction 𝑖𝑖 except where transaction 𝑖𝑖 is an equity volatility 
transaction, in which case the adjusted notional amount for transaction 𝑖𝑖 must be 
calculated as the product of the underlying volatility or variance referenced by 
transaction 𝑖𝑖 and the contractual notional amount of transaction 𝑖𝑖. The adjusted 
notional amount is also subject to the requirements in paragraph 42 of this 
Attachment; and 
𝑀𝑀𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖= the maturity factor for transaction 𝑖𝑖, calculated according to paragraph 48 
of this Attachment. 
Add-on for commodity derivative transactions 
38. 
For the commodity asset class, within each hedging set (refer to paragraph 19 of 
this Attachment), transactions must be further divided into categories, each one 
(𝑘𝑘) containing all the transactions belonging to the same commodity type. An 
ADI must specify categories based on commodity type that are more granular 
than the four broad commodity groups defined in paragraph 19 of this 
Attachment. An ADI must determine the commodity types such that all material 
basis risks36 are captured. All uncaptured basis risks must be formally identified 
and regularly monitored. An ADI must also regularly review and update the 
categorisation of commodity types to reflect any significant changes in 
materiality. Where an ADI is unable to demonstrate to APRA’s satisfaction that 
the basis risks are appropriately captured or monitored, APRA may require the 
ADI to use a more refined set of commodity types. 
39. 
The add-on for each of the four hedging sets 𝑗𝑗, 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑗𝑗
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶, must be calculated 
as: 
                                                 
36  
These basis risks arise due to the impracticality and difficulty in specifying all relevant 
distinctions between commodity types (e.g. location and quality) within the same hedging set. 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment D - 44 
𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑗𝑗
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶
= ඩ൥෍൫𝜌𝜌𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶× 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑗𝑗,𝑘𝑘
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶൯
𝑘𝑘
൩
2
+ ෍ቄ[1 −(𝜌𝜌𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶)2] × ൫𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑗𝑗,𝑘𝑘
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶൯
2ቅ
𝑘𝑘
 
where: 
𝜌𝜌𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶= the supervisory correlation parameter for the commodity asset class; and 
𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑗𝑗,𝑘𝑘
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶= the add-on factor for category 𝑘𝑘, calculated according to 
paragraph 40 of this Attachment. 
40. 
The add-on factor for category 𝑘𝑘 within hedging set 𝑗𝑗, 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑗𝑗,𝑘𝑘
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶, must be 
calculated as: 
𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑗𝑗,𝑘𝑘
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶= 𝑆𝑆𝐹𝐹𝑘𝑘
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶× 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑙𝑙𝑗𝑗,𝑘𝑘
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 
where: 
𝑆𝑆𝐹𝐹𝑘𝑘
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶= the supervisory factor for the commodity group37 for category (i.e. 
commodity type) 𝑘𝑘, calculated according to paragraph 49 of this Attachment; and 
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑗𝑗,𝑘𝑘
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶= the effective notional amount for category 𝑘𝑘, 
calculated according to paragraph 41 of this Attachment. 
41. 
The 
effective 
notional 
amount 
for 
category 
𝑘𝑘, 
denoted 
by 
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑗𝑗,𝑘𝑘
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶, must be calculated as the sum of all individual 
transaction level (i) quantities, according to: 
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑗𝑗,𝑘𝑘
𝐶𝐶𝑂𝑂𝑀𝑀=
෍𝛿𝛿𝑖𝑖×
𝑖𝑖∈𝐼𝐼(𝑗𝑗,𝑘𝑘)
𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑖
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶× 𝑀𝑀𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖 
where: 
𝐼𝐼(𝑗𝑗, 𝑘𝑘) = the set of all transactions belonging to category 𝑘𝑘 and hedging set 𝑗𝑗; 
𝛿𝛿𝑖𝑖= the supervisory delta adjustment for transaction 𝑖𝑖, calculated according to 
paragraphs 43 to 47 of this Attachment; 
𝑀𝑀𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖= the maturity factor for transaction 𝑖𝑖, calculated according to paragraph 48 
of this Attachment; and 
𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑖
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶= the adjusted notional amount for transaction 𝑖𝑖, and must be calculated as 
the product of the current price of one unit of the commodity and the number of 
units referenced by transaction 𝑖𝑖 except where transaction 𝑖𝑖 is a commodity 
                                                 
37  
The groups used for determining the supervisory factors are slightly more granular than that used 
for defining the four hedging sets. In this case, the energy group is further divided into electricity 
and oil/gas. 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment D - 45 
volatility transaction, in which case the adjusted notional amount for transaction 𝑖𝑖 
must be calculated as the product of the underlying volatility or variance 
referenced by transaction 𝑖𝑖 and the contractual notional amount of transaction 𝑖𝑖. 
The adjusted notional amount is also subject to the requirements in paragraph 42 
of this Attachment. 
Transaction-level and supervisory parameters 
Adjusted notional amount 
42. 
For each transaction 𝑖𝑖 in all asset classes, the adjusted notional amount, 𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑖
𝑎𝑎, is 
derived from transaction 𝑖𝑖’s trade notional amount. In many cases the trade 
notional amount is stated clearly and fixed until maturity. Where this is not the 
case, an ADI must apply the following rules to determine the trade notional 
amount: 
(a) 
where the notional is a formula of market values, an ADI must use the 
current market values to determine the trade notional amount; 
(b) 
for interest rate and credit derivative transactions with variable notional 
amounts specified by the contract such as amortising and accreting swaps, 
an ADI must use the time-weighted average notional over the remaining 
life of the swap as the trade notional amount; 
(c) 
for a leveraged swap, the transaction must be converted to the notional of 
the equivalent unleveraged swap; that is, where all rates in a swap are 
multiplied by a factor, the stated notional must be multiplied by the factor 
on the interest rates; 
(d) 
for a derivative contract with multiple exchanges of principal, the notional 
is multiplied by the number of exchanges of principal in the derivative 
contract; and 
(e) 
for a derivative contract that is structured such that on specified dates any 
outstanding exposure is settled and the terms are reset so that the fair value 
of the contract is zero, the remaining maturity (𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖) equals the time until the 
next reset date.38 
Supervisory delta adjustment and treatment of options 
43. 
For each transaction (other than options or collateralised debt obligation (CDO) 
tranches, refer to paragraphs 44 to 47 of this Attachment), the supervisory delta 
adjustment, 𝛿𝛿𝑖𝑖, must be assigned based on whether transaction 𝑖𝑖 is long or short 
in either: (i) the risk factor if 𝑖𝑖 is exposed to a single risk factor, or (ii) the primary 
risk factor if 𝑖𝑖 is exposed to multiple risk factors: 
                                                 
38  
For example, a principal resetting cross-currency swap or a settled-to-market derivative where, at 
the next reset date, the outstanding exposure is settled and the terms are reset so that the fair value 
of the contract is zero. A derivative contract with a mandatory break (where there is a legal 
contractual obligation on both parties to terminate the transaction by the mandatory break date) 
would also be eligible where the outstanding exposure is settled completely. 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment D - 46 
(a) 
Transaction 𝑖𝑖 is long in the risk factor if the market value of 𝑖𝑖 increases 
when the risk factor increases. Where transaction 𝑖𝑖 is long in the risk factor, 
the supervisory delta adjustment δi must be set to the value of 1. 
(b) 
Transaction 𝑖𝑖 is short in the risk factor if the market value of 𝑖𝑖 decreases 
when the risk factor increases. Where transaction 𝑖𝑖 is short in the risk factor, 
the supervisory delta adjustment δi must be set to the value of -1. 
44. 
For options in all asset classes (with the exception of those in paragraph 45 of this 
Attachment), the supervisory delta adjustment δi must be calculated according to 
the formula in Table 4 and the requirements in paragraph 47 of this Attachment. 
Table 4: Formula for supervisory delta adjustment 
 
Bought 
Sold 
Call 
options  
ϕ ൮
ln ቀ𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖
𝐾𝐾𝑖𝑖ቁ+ 0.5 × 𝜎𝜎𝑖𝑖
2 × 𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖
𝜎𝜎𝑖𝑖× ඥ𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖
൲ 
-ϕ ൮
ln ቀ𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖
𝐾𝐾𝑖𝑖ቁ+ 0.5 × 𝜎𝜎𝑖𝑖
2 × 𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖
𝜎𝜎𝑖𝑖× ඥ𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖
൲ 
Put 
options  
-ϕ ൮−
ln ቀ𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖
𝐾𝐾𝑖𝑖ቁ+ 0.5 × 𝜎𝜎𝑖𝑖
2 × 𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖
𝜎𝜎𝑖𝑖× ඥ𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖
൲ ϕ ൮−
ln ቀ𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖
𝐾𝐾𝑖𝑖ቁ+ 0.5 × 𝜎𝜎𝑖𝑖
2 × 𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖
𝜎𝜎𝑖𝑖× ඥ𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖
൲ 
where:  
ϕ(⋅) represents the standard normal cumulative distribution function; 
𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖= the time interval between the calculation date (today) and the latest 
contractual exercise date as referenced by transaction 𝑖𝑖, measured in years; 
𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖= the underlying price39 of option 𝑖𝑖; 
𝐾𝐾𝑖𝑖= the strike price of option 𝑖𝑖; and 
𝜎𝜎𝑖𝑖= the supervisory volatility of the option 𝑖𝑖. 
45. 
For all interest rate options in currency 𝑗𝑗 where the supervisory delta adjustment 
δi for at least one of those options cannot be calculated (i.e. where 𝑃𝑃≤0 and/or 
𝐾𝐾≤0), δi must be calculated according to the formula in Table 5 and the 
requirements in paragraph 47 of this Attachment.40 An ADI must seek approval 
                                                 
39  
Whenever appropriate, forward (rather than spot) value of the underlying should be used in order 
to account for the risk-free rate as well as for possible cash flows prior to the option expiry, such 
as dividends. 
40  
The specification in paragraph 45 of this Attachment relates to interest rate options in the negative 
interest rate environment although a 𝜆𝜆 adjustment could also be applied in other cases where the 
supervisory delta adjustment cannot be computed appropriately. 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment D - 47 
from APRA for the specification and value of 𝜆𝜆𝑗𝑗. APRA may require an ADI to 
use the alternative formula or that a particular value of 𝜆𝜆𝑗𝑗 to be applied. 
Table 5: Alternative formula for supervisory delta adjustment 
 
Bought 
Sold 
Call 
options  
ϕ
⎝
⎛
ln ൬𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖+ 𝜆𝜆𝑗𝑗
𝐾𝐾𝑖𝑖+ 𝜆𝜆𝑗𝑗൰+ 0.5 × 𝜎𝜎𝑖𝑖
2 × 𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖
𝜎𝜎𝑖𝑖× ඥ𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖
⎠
⎞ 
-ϕ
⎝
⎛
ln ൬𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖+ 𝜆𝜆𝑗𝑗
𝐾𝐾𝑖𝑖+ 𝜆𝜆𝑗𝑗൰+ 0.5 × 𝜎𝜎𝑖𝑖
2 × 𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖
𝜎𝜎𝑖𝑖× ඥ𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖
⎠
⎞ 
Put 
options  
-ϕ
⎝
⎛−
ln ൬𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖+ 𝜆𝜆𝑗𝑗
𝐾𝐾𝑖𝑖+ 𝜆𝜆𝑗𝑗൰+ 0.5 × 𝜎𝜎𝑖𝑖
2 × 𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖
𝜎𝜎𝑖𝑖× ඥ𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖
⎠
⎞ 
ϕ
⎝
⎛−
ln ൬𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖+ 𝜆𝜆𝑗𝑗
𝐾𝐾𝑖𝑖+ 𝜆𝜆𝑗𝑗൰+ 0.5 × 𝜎𝜎𝑖𝑖
2 × 𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖
𝜎𝜎𝑖𝑖× ඥ𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖
⎠
⎞ 
where:  
𝜆𝜆𝑗𝑗= the shift parameter applying to the set of all interest rate options in currency 
𝑗𝑗 where 𝜆𝜆𝑗𝑗 would represent the extent to which affected currency 𝑗𝑗 can be 
negative. This would be set to allow computation of the supervisory delta 
adjustment with the objective that 𝜆𝜆𝑗𝑗 is to be set as low as possible. 
46. 
For tranches of CDOs and nth-to-default transactions in the credit asset class, the 
supervisory delta adjustment 𝛿𝛿𝑖𝑖 must be set according to Table 6: 
Table 6: Supervisory delta adjustment for CDO tranches 
Purchased (long protection) 
Sold (short protection) 
15
(14𝐴𝐴𝑖𝑖+ 1) × (14𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖+ 1) 
−
15
(14𝐴𝐴𝑖𝑖+ 1) × (14𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖+ 1) 
where: 
𝐴𝐴𝑖𝑖= the attachment point of the CDO tranche or (𝑛𝑛−1) 𝑚𝑚
⁄
 for an nth-to-default 
transaction on a pool of m reference names for transaction 𝑖𝑖; and 
𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖= the detachment point of the CDO tranche or 𝑛𝑛𝑚𝑚
⁄
 for a nth-to-default 
transaction on a pool of m reference names for transaction 𝑖𝑖. 
47. 
For options, the calculation of transaction level effective notional amount differs 
depending on the nature of the option payoff and must be calculated as follows: 
(a) 
single payment European options must use the supervisory delta adjustment 
formulas in paragraph 44 and 45 of this Attachment; 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment D - 48 
(b) 
single payment Asian options must use the formulas in paragraph 44 and 
45 of this Attachment with 𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖 set equal to the current value of the average 
used in the payoff; 
(c) 
single payment American and Bermudan options must use the formulas in 
paragraph 44 and 45 of this Attachment with 𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖 set equal to the latest 
allowed exercise date; 
(d) 
single payment Bermudan swaptions must  set the start date 𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖 equal to the 
earliest allowed exercise date, and the end date 𝐸𝐸𝑖𝑖 equal to the end date of 
the underlying swap in the formulas in paragraph 25; 
(e) 
single payment digital or binary options with strike 𝐾𝐾𝑖𝑖 must have the payoff 
approximated via a collar combination of bought and sold European options 
of the same type (call or put) with strikes set equal to 0.95 𝐾𝐾𝑖𝑖 and 1.05 𝐾𝐾𝑖𝑖. 
The size of the position in the collar components must be such that the 
digital payoff is reproduced exactly outside the region between the two 
strikes. The effective notional for each component European option must 
be calculated separately using the formulas in paragraph 44 and 45 of this 
Attachment with 𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖 set equal to the exercise date of the digital option and 
𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖 set equal to the current value of the underlying for the digital option. The 
absolute value of the digital option effective notional must be capped by the 
ratio of the digital payoff to the relevant supervisory factor. An ADI may 
use a different treatment in this case, subject to APRA’s approval; 
(f) 
single payment options that can be represented as a combination of single 
payment European options must be decomposed and the effective notional 
amount for each component European option must be calculated separately; 
and 
(g) 
multi-payment options may be represented as a combination of single 
payment options for the purpose of effective notional calculations. If the 
multi-payment option is decomposed, then the effective notional amount 
for each component option must be calculated separately. Interest rate caps 
and floors may be represented as a portfolio of individual caplets and 
floorlets, where each caplet or floorlet is treated as a European option on 
the floating interest rate over a specific coupon period. For each caplet or 
floorlet, the start date 𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖 and exercise date 𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖 must be set equal to the start 
of the coupon period, while the end date 𝐸𝐸𝑖𝑖 must be set equal to the end of 
the coupon period. 
Maturity Factor 
48. 
The maturity factor is set differently for margined and unmargined transactions.  
When the SA-CCR methodology is used by a clearing member ADI, the clearing 
member ADI must determine the MPOR and the maturity factor in conjunction 
with the requirements of paragraphs 12 and 19 of Attachment B of this Prudential 
Standard. 
(a) 
For an unmargined transaction, the maturity factor 𝑀𝑀𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖 must be set as: 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment D - 49 
𝑀𝑀𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖= ඥmin{𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖, 1} 
where: 
𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖 is the maturity date for transaction 𝑖𝑖 as defined in paragraph 21 of this 
Attachment, subject to a floor of 10 business days. 
(b) 
For a margined transaction, the maturity factor 𝑀𝑀𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖 must be set as: 
𝑀𝑀𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖= 1.5ඥ𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑅𝑅𝑖𝑖 
where: 
𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑅𝑅𝑖𝑖 represents the margin period of risk as defined in paragraph 8(o) of 
this Prudential Standard. 
49. 
When calculating the PFE add-on for each asset class, the supervisory factor, the 
supervisory correlation parameter and the supervisory volatility are as given in 
Table 7. 
Table 7: Summary table of supervisory parameters 
Asset 
class 
 
Supervisory 
factor (SF) 
(%)41 
Supervisory 
Correlation 
(ρ) (%) 
Supervisory 
volatility (σ) 
(%) 
Interest rate 
0.5 
N/A 
50 
Foreign exchange 
4.0 
N/A 
15 
Credit 
single name 
Credit 
rating grade 
1 
0.38 
50 
100 
Credit 
rating grade 
2 
0.42 
Credit 
rating grade 
3 
0.54 
Credit 
rating grade 
4 
1.06 
Credit 
rating grade 
5 
1.60 
Credit 
rating grade 
6 
6.0 
Credit index Investment 
grade (IG) 
0.38 
80 
80 
                                                 
41  
The applicable supervisory factor must be multiplied by one-half for basis transactions and 
multiplied by a factor of five for volatility transactions, as specified in paragraph 17 of this 
Attachment. 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment D - 50 
Asset 
class 
 
Supervisory 
factor (SF) 
(%)41 
Supervisory 
Correlation 
(ρ) (%) 
Supervisory 
volatility (σ) 
(%) 
Sub-
investment 
grade (SG) 
1.06 
Equity single name 
32 
50 
120 
Equity index 
20 
80 
75 
Commodity 
Electricity 
40 
40 
150 
Oil/gas 
18 
70 
Metals 
Agricultural 
Other 
 
Treatment of multiple margin agreements and multiple netting sets 
50. 
Where the transactions under a given margin agreement and netting set do not 
coincide, an ADI must follow an alternative treatment: 
(a) 
where multiple margin agreements apply to a single netting set, an ADI 
must follow the treatment set out in paragraph 51 of this Attachment; or 
(b) 
where there are multiple netting sets within a single margin agreement, an 
ADI must follow the treatment set out in paragraph 52 of this Attachment. 
51. 
Where multiple margin agreements apply to a single netting set, the netting set 
must be divided into sub-netting sets, each aligning with its respective margin 
agreement. The EAD of the original netting set must then be obtained by taking 
the sum of the EAD of each sub-netting set. The EAD for each sub-netting set is 
calculated according to paragraphs 42 to 49 of this Attachment using the relevant 
sub-netting set-level (i.e. margin agreement-level) parameters.42 
52. 
Where a single margin agreement applies to multiple netting sets, an ADI must 
calculate the EAD for the netting sets by: 
(a) 
calculating the replacement cost (RC) for all netting sets (𝑅𝑅𝐶𝐶𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀) contained 
within a single margin agreement (𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀) on the aggregate margin agreement 
level,43 as common collateral cannot clearly be allocated to an individual 
netting set. The aggregate RC for all netting sets under a single margin 
agreement must be calculated as: 
                                                 
42  
These parameters include 𝐶𝐶, 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇, 𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀 and 𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁. 
43  
This is opposed to the simplest case where the set of transactions under a margin agreement and 
within the netting set coincide, in which case the replacement cost is calculated on the individual 
netting set-level (NS). 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment D - 51 
𝑅𝑅𝐶𝐶𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀= max ൝൭෍max{𝑉𝑉𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁, 0}
𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁∈𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀
൱−max{𝐶𝐶𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀, 0}, 0ൡ
+ max ൝൭෍min{𝑉𝑉𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁, 0}
𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁∈𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀
൱−min{𝐶𝐶𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀, 0}, 0ൡ 
where: 
𝑉𝑉𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁= the current net mark-to-market value of all derivative transactions 
within the netting set NS; and 
𝐶𝐶𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀= the net haircut value of all currently available collateral (including 
both NICA and VM) under the margin agreement; and 
(b) 
calculating the PFE for the margin agreement (𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝐸𝐸𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀), by taking the sum 
of all the netting set-level PFE factors. The PFE add-on factor for each 
netting set under the margin agreement must be calculated according to the 
methodology for unmargined transactions. 
Treatment of eligible collateral taken outside of netting sets 
53. 
Where eligible collateral is taken outside a netting set but is available to offset 
default losses from transactions subject to SA-CCR, an ADI must calculate the 
EAD as follows: 
(a) 
where eligible collateral is available to offset losses on one netting set only, 
the eligible collateral must be treated as an independent collateral amount 
associated with that netting set; and 
(b) 
where eligible collateral is available to offset losses on more than one 
netting set, the eligible collateral must be treated as collateral taken under a 
single margin agreement applying to multiple netting sets (refer to 
paragraph 52 of this Attachment). 
Where eligible collateral is available to offset losses on transactions subject to 
both SA-CCR and non SA-CCR exposures, the eligible collateral amount in 53(a) 
and 53(b) of this Attachment must only include the portion of eligible collateral 
assigned to the transactions subject to SA-CCR. 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment E - 52 
Attachment E — The adjusted current exposure 
method (adjusted CEM) 
1. 
This Attachment applies only to a standardised ADI. 
2. 
For the purpose of calculating counterparty credit risk requirements under the  
adjusted CEM, an ADI must calculate the CEA of its market-related contracts. 
Where the transaction is secured by eligible collateral or there is an eligible 
guarantee, credit derivatives or netting arrangement in place, the CRM techniques 
set out in Attachments F, G, H and I of APS 112 may be used to reduce the amount 
of the exposure. An ADI must calculate CEA in the following manner: 
(a) 
for market-related transactions that are not covered by an eligible bilateral 
netting agreement as set out in Attachment I of APS 112, the ADI must 
calculate the CEA as: 
for margined44 transactions: 
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶= 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶+ 𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 
for unmargined transactions: 
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶= 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶+ (3 × 𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃) 
where: 
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶= the current credit exposure, calculated as sum of the positive mark-
to-market value (or replacement cost) of these transactions; and 
𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃= the potential future credit exposure of these transactions 
determined in accordance with paragraphs 3 to 11 of this Attachment. 
(b) 
for OTC derivative transactions covered by an eligible bilateral netting 
agreement that satisfies the requirements in Attachment I of APS 112 for 
netting, an ADI must calculate the CEA of transactions subject to a netting 
agreement as: 
for netting agreements containing only margined45 transactions: 
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶= 𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁 (𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝) + 𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 
                                                 
44  
For the purposes of the adjusted CEM, bilateral transactions must be treated as margined 
transactions where there is exchange of variation margin with a zero threshold. Where a 
transaction does not meet these conditions, or where it unclear as to whether a transaction meets 
these conditions, the transaction must be treated as an unmargined transaction. Bilateral 
transactions with a one-way margining agreement in favour of an ADI’s counterparty (that is, 
where an ADI posts, but does not collect, variation margin) must be treated as unmargined 
transactions. Centrally cleared transactions would be treated as either margined or unmargined 
transactions in accordance with the treatment adopted under paragraph 6 of Attachment B. 
45  
Refer to footnote 44 for the definition of margined transaction. 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment E - 53 
 for netting agreements containing only unmargined transactions: 
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶= 𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁 (𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝) + [3 × ൫𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎൯] 
for netting agreements containing both margined and unmargined 
transactions:46 
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶= 𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁 (𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝) + [(1 + 2 × 𝐴𝐴) × ൫𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎൯] 
where: 
𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁= the net current credit exposure (i.e. net mark-to-market) of all 
transactions covered by the netting agreement, if positive. 𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁 must be 
calculated as the sum of all positive and negative mark-to-market values of 
all individual contracts covered by a netting agreement (i.e. positive mark-
to-market values of transactions may be offset against negative mark-to-
market values on other transactions covered by the netting agreement). If 
the net sum of individual mark-to-market values is positive, the 𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁 is 
equal to that sum. If the sum of mark-to-market values is zero or negative, 
the 𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁 is set equal to zero;  
𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎= the add-on for potential future credit exposure based on the 
notional principal of all the individual underlying contracts (i.e. the gross 
potential future credit exposure (𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔)) adjusted to reflect the effects 
of the netting agreement. 𝑃𝑃𝐹𝐹𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 must be determined in accordance with 
paragraphs 12 to 17 of this Attachment; and 
 𝐴𝐴= 
𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 𝑡𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑒 𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎
𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 𝑡𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑒 𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑔𝑔 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎
 
Calculation of potential future credit exposure: transactions that are not 
covered by an eligible bilateral netting agreement 
3. 
An ADI must, for the purpose of calculating its potential future credit exposure 
for each transaction, multiply the notional principal amount of each of these 
transactions by the relevant credit conversion factor (CCF) specified in Table 8. 
Table 8: Current exposure method – market-related CCFs 
Residual 
maturity 
Interest 
rate 
contracts 
(%) 
Foreign 
exchange 
and gold 
contracts 
(%) 
Equity 
contracts 
(%) 
Precious 
metal 
contracts 
(other 
than gold) 
(%) 
Other 
commodity 
contracts 
(other than 
precious 
metals) 
(%) 
≤ 1 year 
0.0 
1.0 
6.0 
7.0 
10.0 
                                                 
46  
Alternatively, an ADI may elect to use the formula for CEA for netting agreements containing 
only unmargined transactions. 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment E - 54 
>1 year,  
≤ 5 years 
0.5 
5.0 
8.0 
7.0 
12.0 
>5 years 
1.5 
7.5 
10.0 
8.0 
15.0 
 
4. 
The notional or nominal principal amount, or value, of a contract must be the 
reference amount used to calculate payment streams between counterparties to a 
contract. 
5. 
Potential future credit exposure must be based on effective rather than apparent 
notional amounts. In the event that the stated notional amount of a contract is 
leveraged or enhanced by the structure of the transaction, an ADI must use the 
effective notional amount when calculating potential future credit exposure. 
6. 
No potential future credit exposure is calculated for single currency 
floating/floating interest rate swaps as the credit exposure on these contracts must 
be evaluated solely on the basis of their mark-to-market values. 
7. 
For contracts that are structured to settle outstanding exposures following 
specified payment dates where the terms are reset such that the mark-to-market 
value of the contract is zero on these specified dates, the residual maturity must 
be set equal to the time until the next reset date.47 In the case of interest rate 
contracts with these features and a remaining maturity of more than one year, the 
CCF to be applied is subject to a floor of 0.5 per cent even if there are reset dates 
of a shorter maturity. 
8. 
For contracts with multiple exchanges of principal, the CCFs must be multiplied 
by the number of remaining payments (i.e. exchanges of principal) still to be made 
under the contract. 
9. 
Contracts that do not fall within one of the specific categories listed in Table 8 
must be treated as ‘other commodities contracts’. 
10. 
An ADI must calculate the counterparty credit risk requirement for single name 
credit default swaps and single name total-rate-of-return swaps in the trading 
book using the potential future exposure CCFs in Table 9. 
Table 9: Potential future exposure credit conversion factors 
Type of swap 
Protection buyer 
(%) 
Protection 
seller48 (%) 
Credit default swap 
Qualifying49 reference obligation 
5 
5 
                                                 
47  
For example, a principal resetting cross-currency swap or a settled-to-market derivative where, at 
the next reset date, the outstanding exposure is settled and the terms are reset so that the fair value 
of the contract is zero. A derivative contract with a mandatory break (where there is a legal 
contractual obligation on both parties to terminate the transaction by the mandatory break date) 
would also be eligible where the outstanding exposure is settled completely. 
48  
The protection seller of a credit default swap would only be subject to the add-on factor where it 
is subject to closeout upon the insolvency of the protection buyer while the underlying asset is 
still solvent. The add-on should be capped to the amount of unpaid premiums. 
49  
The definition of qualifying is the same as for the qualifying category for the treatment of specific 
risk under the standardised measurement method in APS 116. 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment E - 55 
Non-qualifying reference obligation 
10 
10 
Total-rate-of-return swap 
Qualifying reference obligation 
5 
5 
Non-qualifying reference obligation 
10 
10 
11. 
An ADI, in calculating the counterparty credit risk requirement for an nth-to-
default credit derivative transaction (such as a first-to-default transaction), must 
use the add-on determined by the nth-lowest credit quality underlying asset in the 
basket. 
Calculation of potential future credit exposure: Transactions covered by 
an eligible bilateral netting agreement 
12. 
An ADI must recognise the effects of netting agreements on its potential future 
credit exposure by applying the formula below to produce an adjusted add-on 
amount for potential future credit exposure on all contracts subject to the netting 
agreement. Thus: 
𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎= 0.4 (𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔) + 0.6 (𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁× 𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔) 
13. 
The potential future credit exposure (𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔) is calculated as the sum of an 
ADI’s potential future credit exposure for each individual transaction covered by 
a netting agreement with a counterparty as if no netting would occur (with the 
exception of transactions covered by the definition of 𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁 in paragraph 2 of 
this Attachment). Potential future credit exposure for each transaction is 
calculated by multiplying the notional principal amount of the transaction by the 
appropriate CCF for that transaction as set out in Table 8. 
14. 
For the purpose of calculating 𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔, an ADI may treat matching 
transactions included in a netting agreement as a single transaction with a notional 
principal equivalent to the net receipts on those transactions. For this purpose, 
matching transactions are defined as forward foreign exchange and other similar 
market-related transactions in which the notional principal is equivalent to cash 
flows, where the cash flows fall due on the same value date and are in the same 
currency. 
15. 
The net to gross ratio (NGR) is the ratio of the net current exposure of all 
transactions included in a netting agreement to the gross current credit exposure 
(GCCE) of these same transactions. GCCE is the sum of the mark-to-market 
values of all transactions covered by a netting agreement with a positive mark-to-
market value with no offsetting against contracts with a negative mark-to-market 
value (with the exception of transactions covered by the definition of 𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁 in 
paragraph 2 of this Attachment). The NGR reflects the risk reducing portfolio 
effects of netted transactions with respect to current credit exposure. Thus: 
𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁= 𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁/𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺 
16. 
The 𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁 may be calculated using one of the following approaches: 
(a) 
counterparty-by-counterparty approach – under this approach a unique 
NGR is applied to each counterparty in calculating the CEA of transactions 
 
July 2019 
 
APS 180 – Attachment E - 56 
with that counterparty. NGR is defined as the NCCE of all transactions with 
an individual counterparty covered by a netting agreement (i.e. 
𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖) divided by the GCCE of all the transactions with that 
counterparty covered by the netting agreement (i.e. 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖). In 
calculating 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖, negative mark-to-market values for individual 
transactions with the same counterparty may not be used to offset positive 
mark-to-market values for other transactions with the same counterparty; or 
(b) 
aggregate approach – under this approach a single NGR is calculated and 
applied to all counterparties in calculating the CEA for transactions with 
each of those counterparties. The NGR is the ratio of the sum of all NCCEs 
of all transactions with all counterparties subject to any netting agreement 
(i.e. 𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎) to the sum of all of the GCCEs for all transactions of 
all counterparties subject to any netting agreement (i.e. 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎). In 
calculating 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎, negative mark-to-market values of transactions 
with one counterparty cannot be used to offset positive mark-to-market 
values of transactions with that counterparty or any other counterparty 
included in the aggregate calculations. 
17. 
An ADI must consistently use either the counterparty-by-counterparty approach 
or the aggregate approach to calculate the NGR and must inform APRA of which 
approach it intends to use. 
Risk-weighted amount 
18. 
With respect to the netted exposures determined in paragraphs 12 to 17 of this 
Attachment, an ADI must assign the relevant risk weight applicable to a 
counterparty, or if eligible, the risk weight of a guarantor or collateral to the CEA. 
Counterparty risk weightings for OTC derivative transactions will not be subject 
to any specific ceiling. 
19. 
For the purposes of paragraph 28 of Attachment G of APS 112, potential future 
exposure is 𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 as determined in paragraph 12 of this Attachment. 


--- End of file: APS 180 Capital Adequacy Counterparty Credit Risk.txt ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
Prudential Standard APS 210 
Liquidity 
Objectives and key requirements of this Prudential 
Standard 
This Prudential Standard requires an authorised deposit-taking institution to adopt 
prudent practices in managing its liquidity risks and to maintain an adequate level of 
liquidity to meet its obligations as they fall due across a wide range of operating 
circumstances. 
 
The key requirements of this Prudential Standard are that an authorised deposit-taking 
institution must: 
 
 
have a risk management framework to measure, monitor and manage liquidity risk 
that is commensurate with the nature, scale and complexity of the institution; 
 
maintain a portfolio of liquid assets sufficient in size and quality to enable the 
institution to withstand a severe liquidity stress; and 
 
maintain a robust funding structure appropriate for its size, business mix and 
complexity. 
 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 APS 210 - 2  
 
Table of contents 
 
Authority ........................................................................................................... 3 
Application ....................................................................................................... 3 
Interpretation .................................................................................................... 3 
Definitions ........................................................................................................ 4 
Key principles .................................................................................................. 4 
Board and senior management responsibilities ............................................... 4 
Liquidity risk management framework .............................................................. 6 
Management of liquidity risk ............................................................................ 7 
Funding strategy .............................................................................................. 8 
Contingency funding plan ................................................................................ 9 
Classification of ADIs ..................................................................................... 10 
Liquidity coverage ratio ADIs ......................................................................... 10 
Minimum liquidity holdings ADIs .................................................................... 10 
Net stable funding ratio .................................................................................. 10 
Stress testing ................................................................................................. 11 
Local operational capacity  ............................................................................ 11 
Adjustments and exclusions .......................................................................... 12 
Previous exercises of discretion..................................................................... 12 
 
Attachment A - Liquidity coverage ratio  ........................................................ 13 
 
Attachment B - Minimum liquidity holdings approach..................................... 34 
 
Attachment C - Net stable funding ratio ......................................................... 35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 APS 210 - 3  
 
Authority  
1. 
This Prudential Standard is made under section 11AF of the Banking Act 1959 
(Banking Act). 
Application 
2. 
This Prudential Standard applies to all authorised deposit-taking institutions 
(ADIs) under the Banking Act. 
3. 
A reference to an ADI in this Prudential Standard is a reference to: 
(a) 
an ADI on a Level 1 basis; and 
(b) 
a group of which an ADI is a member on a Level 2 basis. 
4. 
If an ADI to which this Prudential Standard applies is: 
(a) 
the holding company for a group of bodies corporate, the ADI must 
ensure that the requirements in this Prudential Standard are met on a Level 
2 basis, where applicable; or 
(b) 
a subsidiary of an authorised non-operating holding company (authorised 
NOHC), the authorised NOHC must ensure that the requirements in this 
Prudential Standard are met on a Level 2 basis, where applicable. 
5. 
If an ADI, or a member of its Level 2 group, is the originating ADI in a 
securitisation and meets the operational requirements for regulatory capital 
relief under Prudential Standard APS 120 Securitisation (APS 120), the ADI 
may exclude the assets and liabilities of the relevant special purpose vehicles 
(SPVs) from the calculation of its minimum liquidity holdings (MLH) and net 
stable funding ratio (NSFR), as applicable. For the purposes of calculating its 
liquidity coverage ratio (LCR), an ADI must include the cash flows from the 
assets and liabilities of SPVs related to the ADI’s securitisation activities in the 
ADI’s reported amounts. 
6. 
This Prudential Standard commences on 1 January 2018. 
Interpretation 
7. 
Terms that are defined in Prudential Standard APS 001 Definitions (APS 001) 
appear in bold the first time they are used in this Prudential Standard. 
8. 
Where this Prudential Standard provides for APRA to exercise a power or 
discretion, this power or discretion is to be exercised in writing. 
9. 
In this Prudential Standard, unless the contrary intention appears, a reference to 
a provision of an Act, Regulations or Prudential Standard is a reference to the 
provision as in force from time to time. 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 APS 210 - 4  
 
Definitions  
10. 
The following definitions apply in this Prudential Standard: 
(a) 
associated entity – an associated entity within the meaning of section 
50AAA of the Corporations Act 2001; and 
(b) 
financial institution – an entity within the meaning of paragraph 4 of 
APS 001. For the avoidance of doubt, this definition includes money 
market corporations, finance companies, friendly societies and the trustees 
of superannuation/pension funds, public unit trusts/mutual funds and cash 
management trusts. 
Key principles 
11. 
An ADI is responsible for the sound management of its liquidity risk and must 
have a robust framework to manage its liquidity risk accordingly. 
12. 
An ADI must at all times maintain sufficient liquidity to meet its obligations as 
they fall due and hold a minimum level of liquid assets to survive a severe 
liquidity stress. 
13. 
An ADI must ensure that its activities are funded with stable sources of funding 
on an ongoing basis. 
14. 
An ADI must inform APRA as soon as possible of any concerns it has about its 
current or future liquidity position, and its plans to address those concerns. In 
particular, if an ADI experiences a severe liquidity stress, it must notify APRA 
immediately and advise the action that is being taken to address the situation. 
Board and senior management responsibilities 
15. 
An ADI’s Board of directors (Board) is ultimately responsible for the sound 
and prudent management of the liquidity risk of the ADI. An ADI must 
maintain a liquidity risk management framework commensurate with the level 
and extent of liquidity risk to which the ADI is exposed from its activities. In 
relation to a foreign ADI, the responsibilities of the Board in this Prudential 
Standard are to be fulfilled by the senior officer outside Australia. 
16. 
The liquidity risk management framework must include, at a minimum: 
(a) 
a statement of the ADI’s liquidity risk tolerance, approved by the Board; 
(b) 
the liquidity management strategy and policy of the ADI, approved by the 
Board; 
(c) 
the ADI’s operating standards (e.g. in the form of policies, procedures 
and controls) for identifying, measuring, monitoring and controlling its 
liquidity risk in accordance with its liquidity risk tolerance; 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 APS 210 - 5  
 
(d) 
the ADI’s funding strategy, approved by the Board; and 
(e) 
a contingency funding plan. 
17. 
The Board must ensure that: 
(a) 
senior management and other relevant personnel have the necessary 
experience to manage liquidity risk; and 
(b) 
the ADI’s liquidity risk management framework and liquidity risk 
management practices are documented and reviewed at least annually. 
18. 
The Board must review regular reports on the liquidity position of the ADI and, 
where necessary, information on new or emerging liquidity risks. 
19. 
An ADI’s senior management must, at a minimum: 
(a) 
develop a liquidity management strategy, policies and processes in 
accordance with the Board-approved liquidity tolerance; 
(b) 
ensure that the ADI maintains sufficient liquidity at all times; 
(c) 
determine the structure, responsibilities and controls for managing 
liquidity risk and for overseeing the liquidity positions of all legal entities, 
branches and subsidiaries in the jurisdictions in which the ADI is active, 
and outline these elements clearly in the ADI’s liquidity policies; 
(d) 
ensure that the ADI has adequate internal controls to ensure the integrity 
of its liquidity risk management processes; 
(e) 
ensure that stress tests, contingency funding plans and holdings of liquid 
assets are effective and appropriate for the ADI; 
(f) 
establish a set of reporting criteria specifying the scope, manner and 
frequency of reporting for various recipients (such as the Board, senior 
management and the asset/liability committee) including the parties 
responsible for preparing the reports; 
(g) 
establish specific procedures and approvals necessary for exceptions to 
policies and limits, including escalation procedures and follow-up actions 
to be taken for breaches of limits; 
(h) 
closely monitor current trends and potential market developments that 
may present significant, unprecedented and complex challenges for 
managing liquidity risk so that appropriate and timely changes to the 
liquidity management strategy may be made as needed; and 
(i) 
continuously review information on the ADI’s liquidity developments 
and report to the Board on a regular basis. 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 APS 210 - 6  
 
20. 
Senior management and the Board must be able to demonstrate a thorough 
understanding of the links between funding liquidity risk (the risk that an ADI 
may not be able to meet its financial obligations as they fall due) and market 
liquidity risk (the risk that liquidity in financial markets, such as the market for 
debt securities, may reduce significantly), as well as how other risks, including 
credit, market, operational and reputation risks, affect the ADI’s overall 
liquidity risk management strategy. 
Liquidity risk management framework 
21. 
An ADI’s liquidity risk tolerance defines the level of liquidity risk that the 
ADI is willing to assume. An ADI’s liquidity risk tolerance must be 
documented and appropriate for the ADI’s operations and strategy and its role 
in the financial system. 
22. 
The liquidity risk tolerance must be reviewed, at least annually, to reflect the 
ADI’s financial condition and funding capacity. 
23. 
In setting the liquidity risk tolerance, the Board and senior management must 
ensure that the risk tolerance allows the ADI to effectively manage its liquidity 
position in such a way that it is able to withstand a prolonged period of stress. 
24. 
The liquidity risk tolerance must be articulated in such a way that clearly states 
the trade-off between risks and profits. 
25. 
An ADI’s liquidity risk management framework must clearly set out the 
organisational structure as it relates to liquidity for the ADI on both a Level 1 
and Level 2 basis, and define the responsibilities and roles of management 
involved in managing liquidity risk. 
26. 
An ADI’s liquidity risk management framework must be formulated to ensure 
that the ADI maintains sufficient liquidity, including a cushion of 
unencumbered liquid assets, to withstand a range of stress events, including 
those involving the loss or impairment of both unsecured and secured funding 
sources. The source of liquidity stress could be specific to the ADI or 
market-wide or a combination of the two. 
27. 
An ADI’s liquidity risk management framework must be well integrated into 
the ADI’s overall risk management process. 
28. 
An ADI’s liquidity risk management oversight function must be operationally 
independent and staffed with personnel who have the skills and authority to 
challenge the ADI’s treasury and other liquidity risk management businesses. 
29. 
The liquidity management strategy must include specific policies on liquidity 
management, such as: 
(a) 
the composition and maturity of assets and liabilities; 
(b) 
the diversity and stability of funding sources; 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 APS 210 - 7  
 
(c) 
the approach to managing liquidity in different currencies, across borders, 
and across business lines and legal entities; and 
(d) 
the approach to intraday liquidity management. 
30. 
The liquidity management strategy must take account of the ADI’s liquidity 
needs under normal conditions as well as periods of liquidity stress. The 
strategy must include quantitative and qualitative targets. 
31. 
The liquidity management strategy must be appropriate for the nature, scale and 
complexity of the ADI. In formulating this strategy, the ADI must consider its 
legal structure, key business lines, the breadth and diversity of markets, 
products and jurisdictions in which it operates and home and host regulatory 
requirements. 
32. 
The liquidity management strategy, key policies for implementing the 
strategy and the liquidity risk management structure must be communicated 
throughout the organisation by senior management. 
33. 
An ADI must have adequate policies, procedures and controls in place to ensure 
that the Board and senior management are informed immediately of new and 
emerging liquidity concerns. These include increasing funding costs or 
concentrations, increases in any funding requirements, the lack of availability 
of alternative sources of liquidity, material and/or persistent breaches of limits, 
a significant decline in the cushion of unencumbered liquid assets or changes in 
external market conditions that could signal future difficulties. 
34. 
Senior management must be satisfied that all business units conducting 
activities that have an impact on liquidity are fully aware of the liquidity 
management strategy and operate in accordance with approved policies, 
procedures, limits and controls. 
35. 
The liquidity risk management framework must be subject to effective review 
on an ongoing basis, in addition to a comprehensive review as part of the review 
of the risk management framework under Prudential Standard CPS 220 Risk 
Management (CPS 220). 
Management of liquidity risk 
36. 
An ADI must have a sound process for identifying, measuring, monitoring and 
controlling liquidity risk. This process must include a robust framework for 
comprehensively projecting cash flows arising from assets, liabilities and off-
balance sheet items over an appropriate set of time horizons. 
37. 
An ADI must set limits to control its liquidity risk exposure and 
vulnerabilities. Limits and corresponding escalation procedures must be 
reviewed regularly. Limits must be relevant to the business in terms of its 
location, complexity of activity, nature of products, currencies and markets 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 APS 210 - 8  
 
served. Where a liquidity risk limit is breached, an ADI must implement a plan of 
action to review the exposure and reduce it to a level that is within the limit. 
38. 
An ADI must actively manage its collateral positions, differentiating between 
encumbered and unencumbered assets. An ADI must monitor the legal entity 
and physical location where collateral is held and how it may be mobilised in a 
timely manner. 
39. 
An ADI must design a set of early warning indicators to aid its daily liquidity 
risk management processes in identifying the emergence of increased risk or 
vulnerabilities in its liquidity risk position or potential funding needs. Such 
early warning indicators must be structured so as to assist in the identification 
and escalation of any negative trends in the ADI’s liquidity position and lead to 
an assessment and potential response by management to mitigate the ADI’s 
exposure to these trends. 
40. 
An ADI must have a reliable management information system that provides the 
Board, senior management and other appropriate personnel with timely and 
forward-looking information on the liquidity position of the ADI. 
41. 
An ADI must actively manage its intraday liquidity positions and risks in 
order to meet payment and settlement obligations on a timely basis under both 
normal and stressed conditions, thus contributing to the orderly functioning of 
payment and settlement systems. 
42. 
An ADI must develop and implement a costs and benefits allocation process for 
funding and liquidity that appropriately apportions the costs of prudent liquidity 
management to the sources of liquidity risk and provides appropriate incentives 
to manage liquidity risk. 
43. 
An ADI active in multiple currencies must: 
(a) 
maintain liquid assets consistent with the distribution of its liquidity needs 
by currency; 
(b) 
assess its aggregate foreign currency liquidity needs and determine an 
acceptable level of currency mismatches; and 
(c) 
undertake a separate analysis of its strategy for each currency in which it 
has material activities, considering potential constraints in times of stress. 
Funding strategy 
44. 
An ADI must: 
(a) 
develop and document a three-year funding strategy, which must be 
provided to APRA on request; 
(b) 
maintain an ongoing presence in its chosen funding markets and strong 
relationships with funds providers; and 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 APS 210 - 9  
 
(c) 
regularly gauge its capacity to raise funds quickly. It must identify the 
main factors that affect its ability to raise funds and monitor those factors 
closely to ensure that estimates of fund-raising capacity remain valid. 
45. 
The funding strategy must be reviewed and approved by the Board, at least 
annually, and supported by robust assumptions in line with the ADI’s liquidity 
management strategy and business objectives. 
46. 
The funding strategy must be reviewed and updated, at least annually, to 
account for, at a minimum, changed funding conditions and/or a change in the 
ADI’s strategy. An ADI must advise APRA of any material changes to the 
ADI’s funding strategy. 
Contingency funding plan 
47. 
An ADI must have a formal contingency funding plan that clearly sets out the 
strategies for addressing liquidity shortfalls in stressed situations. The plan 
must outline policies to manage a range of stress environments, establish clear 
lines of responsibility and include clear invocation and escalation procedures. 
48. 
An ADI’s contingency funding plan must be commensurate with its 
complexity, risk profile, scope of operations and role in the financial systems in 
which it operates. The plan must articulate available contingency funding 
sources and the amount of funds an ADI estimates can be derived from these 
sources, clear escalation/prioritisation procedures detailing when and how 
each of the actions can and must be activated and the lead time needed to tap 
additional funds from each of the contingency sources. The contingency funding 
plan must provide a framework with a high degree of flexibility so that an ADI 
can respond quickly in a variety of situations. 
49. 
The plan’s design, scope and procedures must be closely integrated with the 
ADI’s ongoing analysis of liquidity risk and with the assumptions used in its 
stress tests and the results of those stress tests. As such, the plan must address 
issues over a range of different time horizons, including intraday. 
50. 
For an ADI that has retail deposits, the plan must address a retail deposit run 
and must include measures to repay retail depositors as soon as practicable. The 
retail run contingency plan must not rely upon closing distribution channels to 
retail depositors. The retail run contingency plan must seek to ensure that in the 
event of a loss of market confidence in the ADI, retail depositors wishing to 
retrieve their deposits may do so as quickly and as conveniently as is practicable 
in the circumstances, and within the contractual terms and conditions applicable 
to the relevant deposit products. 
51. 
An ADI’s contingency funding plan must be reviewed and tested, at least 
annually, to ensure its effectiveness and operational feasibility. An ADI’s 
Board must review and approve the contingency funding plan, at least 
annually, or more often as changing business or market circumstances require. 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 APS 210 - 10  
 
Classification of ADIs 
52. 
For a locally incorporated ADI, APRA will determine whether an ADI is 
classified as a Liquidity Coverage Ratio ADI (LCR ADI) or a Minimum 
Liquidity Holdings ADI (MLH ADI) for the purposes of this Prudential 
Standard. 
53. 
A foreign ADI is an LCR ADI, unless APRA determines that the foreign ADI is 
an MLH ADI. In making a determination, APRA will give consideration to the 
ADI’s size and complexity with respect to liquidity risk. 
54. 
An ADI is required to meet the minimum quantitative requirements associated 
with its classification on a continuous basis, absent a situation of financial 
stress. 
Liquidity coverage ratio ADIs 
55. 
An LCR ADI must maintain an adequate level of unencumbered high-quality 
liquid assets (HQLA) to meet its liquidity needs for a 30 calendar day period 
under a severe stress scenario, in accordance with Attachment A. Absent a 
situation of financial stress (refer to paragraph 5 of Attachment A): 
(a) 
for a locally incorporated ADI, the value of each of the Australian dollar 
(AUD) LCR and all currencies LCR must not be less than 100 per cent; 
and 
(b) 
for a foreign ADI, the value of the LCR must not be less than 40 per cent 
on an all currencies basis. 
56. 
APRA may require an LCR ADI to maintain a higher minimum LCR if it has 
concerns about the ADI’s liquidity risk profile or the quality of its liquidity risk 
management. 
Minimum liquidity holdings ADIs 
57. 
An MLH ADI must maintain a minimum holding of nine per cent of its 
liabilities in specified liquid assets, in accordance with Attachment B. 
58. 
APRA may require an MLH ADI to maintain higher minimum liquidity 
holdings if it has concerns about the ADI’s liquidity risk profile or the quality of 
its liquidity risk management. 
Net stable funding ratio  
59. 
A locally incorporated ADI classified as an LCR ADI must meet the NSFR 
requirements in this Prudential Standard. 
 
60. 
A locally incorporated LCR ADI must maintain an NSFR of at least 100 per 
cent at all times. 
 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 APS 210 - 11  
 
61. 
APRA may require an LCR ADI to maintain a higher minimum NSFR where 
APRA considers it appropriate to do so, including if it has concerns about the 
ADI’s funding or liquidity risk profile or the quality of its liquidity risk 
management. 
 
Stress testing 
62. 
In addition to the requirements contained in paragraphs 52 to 56 of this 
Prudential Standard, an LCR ADI must conduct stress tests on a regular basis 
for a variety of short-term and protracted institution-specific and market-wide 
stress scenarios (individually and in combination) to identify sources of 
potential liquidity strain and to ensure that current exposures remain in 
accordance with the ADI’s liquidity risk tolerance. 
63. 
The stress test outcomes must be used to adjust the ADI’s liquidity 
management strategy, policies and positions and to develop effective 
contingency plans to deal with events of liquidity stress. 
64. 
Stress tests must enable the ADI to analyse the impact of stress scenarios on its 
Level 1 and Level 2 liquidity positions, as well as on the liquidity positions of 
individual business lines. 
65. 
An LCR ADI’s stress test scenarios and related assumptions must be well 
documented and reviewed together with the stress test results. Stress test results 
and vulnerabilities and any resulting actions must be reported to, and discussed 
with, the Board and APRA. Results of the stress tests must be integrated into 
the ADI’s strategic planning process and its day-to-day risk management 
practices. The results of the stress tests must be explicitly considered in the 
setting of internal limits. 
66. 
An LCR ADI must decide how to incorporate the results of stress tests in 
assessing and planning for related potential funding shortfalls in its contingency 
funding plan. 
Local operational capacity  
67. 
A foreign ADI must perform an assessment of its local operational capacity 
(LOC) to liquidate assets and make or receive payments without assistance from 
staff located outside Australia, at least annually, and provide the results of the 
assessment to APRA upon request. 
68. 
A foreign ADI, in performing a LOC assessment, must ensure at a minimum, it 
considers a scenario involving a combination of time zones, different public 
holidays and an offshore operational risk event under which the foreign ADI 
would operate, including making and receiving payments, for a minimum of 
three business days without assistance from staff located outside Australia. For 
this purpose, the foreign ADI may assume that related-party operations within 
Australia continue to function normally. 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 APS 210 - 12  
 
69. 
APRA may impose additional requirements on a foreign ADI if the LOC 
assessment highlights issues concerning the ability of the foreign ADI to 
liquidate assets and make or receive payments without assistance from staff 
located outside Australia. 
Adjustments and exclusions 
70. 
APRA may adjust or exclude a specific requirement in this Prudential Standard 
in relation to an ADI.1 
Previous exercise of discretion 
71. 
An ADI must contact APRA if it seeks to place reliance, for the purposes of 
complying with this Prudential Standard, on a previous exemption or other 
exercise of discretion by APRA under a previous version of this Prudential 
Standard. 
                                                 
1  
Refer to subsection 11AF(2) of the Banking Act. 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment A - 13 
Attachment A 
Liquidity coverage ratio  
 
1. 
The objective of the LCR is to ensure that an ADI maintains an adequate level 
of unencumbered HQLA that can be converted into cash to meet its liquidity 
needs for a 30 calendar day time period under a severe liquidity stress scenario. 
2. 
The LCR has two components: 
 
(a) 
the value of the stock of HQLA; and 
 
(b) 
total net cash outflows, calculated according to the scenario parameters 
set out in this Attachment. 
 
3. 
The LCR is calculated as:  
 
Stock of HQLA                                                               
 
Total net cash outflows over the next 30 calendar days 
 
4. 
An ADI must include an appropriate buffer of HQLA over the LCR requirement 
in line with its liquidity risk tolerance. 
 
5. 
During a period of financial stress, an ADI may need to liquidate part of its stock 
of HQLA and/or draw on its Committed Liquidity Facility (CLF) with the 
Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA), using the cash generated to cover cash 
outflows; as a consequence, the LCR may fall below the minimum level required 
under paragraph 55 of this Prudential Standard. An ADI must inform APRA 
immediately in the event of an actual breach of its LCR requirement or if it 
becomes aware of circumstances that may result in a breach of its LCR 
requirement. 
 
Eligible stock of high-quality liquid assets (HQLA) 
6. 
There are two categories of assets that may be included in the stock of HQLA. 
Assets that may be included in each category are those that the ADI is holding 
on the first day of the stress period, irrespective of their residual maturity. The 
highest-quality liquid assets (HQLA1) may be included without limit, while 
other high-quality liquid assets (HQLA2) – which includes HQLA2A and 
HQLA2B – may only comprise up to 40 per cent of the total stock of HQLA. 
HQLA2B must not exceed 15 per cent of the total stock of HQLA. HQLA2B 
must be included within the overall 40 per cent cap on HQLA2. 
 
7. 
The calculation of the 40 per cent cap detailed in paragraph 6 of this 
Attachment, and the 15 per cent cap detailed in paragraph 6 of this Attachment, 
must take into account the impact on the stock of HQLA of the amounts of 
HQLA1 and HQLA2 involved in secured funding, secured lending and 
collateral swaps transactions maturing within 30 calendar days. The maximum 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment A - 14 
amount of adjusted HQLA2 in the stock of HQLA is equal to two-thirds of the 
adjusted amount of HQLA1 after haircuts have been applied. The maximum 
amount of adjusted HQLA2B in the stock of HQLA is equal to either: 15/85 of 
the sum of the adjusted amounts of HQLA1 and HQLA2A after haircuts have 
been applied; or, in cases where the 40 per cent cap is binding, up to one 
quarter of the adjusted amounts of HQLA1 after haircuts are applied. 
 
8. 
The adjusted amount of HQLA1 is the amount of HQLA1 that would result 
after unwinding short-term secured funding, secured lending and collateral 
swap transactions involving the exchange of any HQLA for any HQLA1 that 
meet, or would meet if held unencumbered, the operational requirements for 
HQLA set out in paragraphs 22 to 25 of this Attachment. The adjusted amount 
of HQLA2A is defined as the amount of HQLA2A that would result after 
unwinding those short-term secured funding, secured lending and collateral 
swap transactions involving the exchange of any HQLA for any HQLA2A that 
meet, or would meet if held unencumbered, the operational requirements for 
HQLA set out in paragraphs 22 to 25 of this Attachment. The adjusted amount 
of HQLA2B is the amount of HQLA2B that would result after unwinding 
short-term secured funding, secured lending and collateral swap transactions 
involving the exchange of any HQLA for HQLA2B that meet, or would meet 
if held unencumbered, the operational requirements for HQLA set out in 
paragraphs 22 to 25 of this Attachment. In this context, short-term 
transactions are transactions with a maturity date up to and including 30 
calendar days. 
 
HQLA1 
 
9. 
HQLA1 may comprise an unlimited share of the stock of eligible HQLA. 
HQLA1 are included at market value and are not subject to a haircut under the 
LCR. These assets are limited to: 
 
(a) 
notes and coin; 
 
(b) 
central bank balances, to the extent that these balances may be drawn 
down in times of stress; 
 
(c) 
marketable securities representing claims on or claims guaranteed by 
sovereigns, central banks, public sector entities (PSEs), the Bank for 
International Settlements (BIS), the International Monetary Fund (IMF), 
the European Central Bank (ECB) and European Union (EU) or 
multilateral development banks (MDBs), and that satisfy all of the 
following conditions: 
 
(i) 
assigned a zero per cent risk-weight under Attachment A of 
Prudential Standard APS 112 Capital Adequacy: Standardised 
Approach to Credit Risk (APS 112); 
(ii) 
traded in large, deep and active repo or cash markets characterised 
by a low level of concentration; 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment A - 15 
(iii) proven record as a reliable source of liquidity in the markets (repo 
or sale) even during stressed market conditions; and 
(iv) not an obligation of a financial institution or any of its associated 
entities; 
(d) for non-zero per cent risk-weighted sovereigns: sovereign or  central 
bank debt  securities issued in domestic currencies by the sovereign or 
central bank in the country in which the liquidity risk is being taken or in 
the ADI’s home country; and 
 
(e) for non-zero per cent risk-weighted sovereigns: domestic  sovereign  or  
central  bank  debt securities issued in foreign currencies are eligible up 
to the amount of the ADI’s stressed net cash outflows in that specific 
foreign currency stemming from the ADI’s operations in the jurisdiction 
where the ADI’s liquidity risk is being taken. 
 
HQLA2A 
10. 
An ADI may include the following as HQLA2A where these assets have been 
recognised by APRA or the relevant prudential regulator in the jurisdiction 
where the liquidity risk is taken. A 15 per cent haircut is applied to the current 
market value of each HQLA2A held in the stock of eligible HQLA. HQLA2A 
are limited to: 
 
(a) 
marketable securities representing claims on or guaranteed by 
sovereigns, central banks, PSEs or MDBs that satisfy all of the following 
conditions: 
 
(i) 
assigned a 20 per cent risk-weight under Attachment A of APS 112; 
 
(ii) 
traded in large, deep and active repo or cash markets characterised 
by a low level of concentration; 
 
(iii) proven record as a reliable source of liquidity in the markets (repo 
or sale) even during stressed market conditions (i.e. maximum 
decline of price not exceeding 10 per cent or increase in haircut not 
exceeding 10 percentage points over a 30-day period during a 
relevant period of significant liquidity stress); and 
 
(iv) not an obligation of a financial institution or any of its associated 
entities; 
 
(b) 
corporate debt securities (including commercial paper) and covered 
bonds that satisfy all of the following conditions: 
 
(i) 
in the case of corporate debt securities: are not issued by a financial 
institution or any of its associated entities and are plain vanilla 
assets whose valuation is readily available based on standard 
methods and does not depend on private knowledge; 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment A - 16 
 
(ii) 
in the case of covered bonds: are not issued by the ADI itself or 
any of its associated entities; 
 
(iii) the assets have a credit rating from a recognised external credit 
assessment institution (ECAI) of at least AA-2 or, in the case of 
an ADI that has approval to use the internal ratings-based (IRB) 
approach to credit risk under Prudential Standard APS 113 
Capital Adequacy: Internal Ratings-based Approach to Credit Risk 
(APS 113), do not have a credit assessment by a recognised ECAI 
and are internally rated as having a probability of default (PD) 
corresponding to a credit rating of at least AA-; 
 
(iv) traded in large, deep and active repo or cash markets characterised 
by a low level of concentration; and 
 
(v) 
proven record as a reliable source of liquidity in the markets (repo 
or sale) even during stressed market conditions (i.e. maximum 
decline of price or increase in haircut over a 30-day period during a 
relevant period of significant liquidity stress not exceeding 10 per 
cent). 
 
11. 
The portfolio of HQLA2A held by the ADI must be well diversified in terms of 
type of assets, type of issuer and specific counterparty or issuer. 
 
HQLA2B 
12. 
An ADI may include the following as HQLA2B where these assets have been 
recognised by APRA or the relevant prudential regulator in the jurisdiction 
where the liquidity risk is taken: 
 
(a) subject to a 25 per cent haircut, residential mortgage backed securities that 
satisfy the following criteria: 
 
(i) 
are not issued by, nor are the underlying exposures originated by,  
the ADI itself or an associated entity of the ADI; 
 
(ii) 
have a long-term credit rating from a recognised ECAI of AA or 
higher3 or, in the absence of a long-term rating, a short-term rating 
equivalent in quality to the long-term rating; 
 
(iii) traded in large, deep and active repo or cash markets characterised 
by a low level of concentration; 
 
(iv) proven record as a reliable source of liquidity in markets (repo or 
                                                 
2  
In the event of an asset having multiple assessments, the applicable rating must be determined 
according to the method used in APS 112. 
3  
Refer to footnote 2. 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment A - 17 
sale) even during stressed market conditions (i.e. a maximum 
decline in price not exceeding 20 per cent or increase in haircut 
over a 30-day period not exceeding 20 percentage points during a 
relevant period of significant liquidity stress); 
 
(v) 
the underlying asset pool is restricted to residential mortgages and 
cannot contain structured products; 
 
(vi) the underlying mortgages are full recourse loans and, at issuance, 
have a maximum average loan-to-valuation ratio (LVR) of 80 per 
cent; and 
 
(vii) the securitisation is subject to risk retention regulations which 
requires an issuer to retain an interest in the assets they securitise; 
 
(b) subject to a 50 per cent haircut, corporate debt securities (including 
commercial paper) that satisfy the following criteria: 
 
(i) 
are not issued by a financial institution or an associated entity; 
 
(ii) 
either: 
 
(1) have a long-term credit rating from a recognised ECAI 
between A+ and BBB-4 or, in the absence of a long-term 
rating, a short-term rating equivalent in quality to the long-
term rating; or 
 
(2) in the case of an ADI that has approval to use the IRB 
approach to credit risk under APS 113, do not have a credit 
assessment by a recognised ECAI and are internally rated as 
having a PD estimate corresponding to a credit rating of 
between A+ and BBB-; 
 
(iii) traded in large, deep and active repo or cash markets characterised 
by a low level of concentration; and 
 
(iv) proven record as a reliable source of liquidity in markets (repo or 
sale) even during stressed market conditions (i.e. a maximum 
decline in price not exceeding 20 per cent or increase in haircut 
over a 30-day period not exceeding 20 percentage points during a 
relevant period of significant liquidity stress). 
 
(c) subject to a 50 per cent haircut, common equity shares that satisfy the 
following criteria: 
 
(i) 
are not issued by a financial institution or an associated entity; 
 
                                                 
4  
Refer to footnote 2. 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment A - 18 
(ii) 
are exchange traded and centrally cleared; 
 
(iii) are a constituent of the major stock index where the liquidity risk is 
taken; 
 
(iv) are denominated in the currency of the jurisdiction where a bank’s 
liquidity risk is taken; 
 
(v) 
traded in large, deep active repo or cash markets characterised by a 
low level of concentration; and 
 
(vi) proven record as a reliable source of liquidity in markets (repo or 
sale) even during stressed market conditions, i.e. a maximum 
decline in share price not exceeding 40 per cent or increase in 
haircut not exceeding 40 percentage points over a 30-day period 
during a relevant period of significant liquidity stress. 
 
Use of alternative liquid asset treatment for LCR  
13. 
A locally incorporated LCR ADI may establish a CLF with the RBA, sufficient 
in size to cover any shortfall in Australian dollars between the ADI’s holdings 
of HQLA and net cash outflows. Qualifying collateral for the CLF will 
comprise all assets eligible for repurchase transactions with the RBA under 
normal market conditions and any other assets nominated by the RBA. 
 
14. 
The CLF must only be used by an ADI to manage any shortfall in Australian 
dollars between its holding of HQLA and its net cash outflows. 
 
15. 
The amount of HQLA that may be included in the numerator of an ADI’s LCR 
calculation is the market value of HQLA1 and HQLA2 held by the ADI, after 
applicable haircuts as outlined in paragraphs 10 and 12 of this Attachment, plus 
the lowest of: 
 
(a) 
the contractual amount of the CLF an ADI has agreed with the RBA that 
is approved by APRA for LCR purposes (refer to paragraphs 17 to 20 of 
this Attachment); or 
 
(b) 
the contractual amount of the CLF as defined in paragraph 15(a), 
 
less the market value, after RBA margins have been applied, of eligible 
CLF securities that have been pledged as collateral under maturing 
secured funding transactions to a counterparty and to which a zero per 
cent run-off rate applies, 
 
plus the market value, after RBA margins have been applied, of eligible 
CLF securities that have been received by the ADI as collateral under 
maturing secured lending transactions, where the collateral received is not 
used to cover short positions as outlined in paragraph 55 of this 
Attachment, and to which a zero per cent inflow rate applies; or 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment A - 19 
 
(c) 
the market value of the assets held by an ADI as collateral for the CLF 
after applicable RBA margins have been applied. 
 
16. 
Assets held by an ADI for the purposes of the CLF must: 
 
(a) 
meet the operational requirements for HQLA as outlined in paragraphs 22 
to 25 of this Attachment; and 
 
(b) 
be well diversified in terms of type of assets, type of issuer and specific 
counterparty or issuer. 
 
17. 
An ADI that requires a CLF from the RBA for LCR purposes must apply to 
APRA for approval before establishing the CLF. 
 
18. 
To facilitate APRA’s approval process, the ADI’s funding strategy must clearly 
state the amount of the CLF required in the forecast period. An ADI must make 
every reasonable effort to manage its liquidity risk through its own balance 
sheet management before applying for a CLF for LCR purposes. 
 
19. 
Following the initial approval, an ADI must apply on an annual basis for 
APRA’s approval of the size of the CLF that may be recognised for LCR 
purposes. 
 
20. 
In the case of unforeseen changes in circumstances, an ADI may apply to 
APRA, at any time, for a change in the amount of its CLF to be recognised for 
LCR purposes by submitting an updated Board-approved funding and liquidity 
plan. 
 
21. 
In the event that an ADI draws funds under its CLF other than for intraday 
purposes or the funding of end-of-day balances held at the RBA, senior 
management must attest that the proceeds of the drawdown will be used for 
Australian dollar liquidity needs only. APRA must be advised of any proposed 
drawdown of the CLF that is not for intraday purposes or for the funding of 
end-of-day balances held at the RBA. 
 
Operational requirements 
22. 
All assets in the stock of eligible HQLA must be managed as part of that stock 
and are subject to the following operational requirements: 
 
(a) 
the assets must be available for the ADI to convert into cash at any time; 
 
(b) 
the assets must be unencumbered and be under the control of the specific 
function or functions charged with managing the liquidity risk of the ADI. 
This would typically be the treasurer who must have the continuous 
authority, and legal and operational capability, to monetise any asset in 
the stock; and 
 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment A - 20 
(c) 
control must be evidenced either by maintaining assets in a separate pool 
managed by the function with the sole intent to use as a source of 
contingent funds, or by demonstrating that the function can monetise the 
asset at any point in the 30-day stress period and that the proceeds of 
doing so are available to the function throughout the 30-day stress period 
without directly conflicting with a stated business or risk management 
strategy. 
 
23. 
The assets must not be pledged to secure, collateralise or credit enhance any 
transactions or be designated to cover operational costs (such as rents and 
salaries). Assets received in reverse repo and securities financing transactions 
that are held at the ADI, have not been rehypothecated and are legally and 
contractually available for the ADI’s use may be considered as part of the stock 
of HQLA. 
 
24. 
At Level 2, an ADI may also include in the stock of HQLA, liquid assets that 
qualify for inclusion in the numerator of the LCR as set out in paragraphs 9 to 
17, 22 to 23 and 28 of this Attachment, where they are held to meet legal 
entity requirements, where applicable, and the related risks as measured by the 
legal entity’s net cash outflows are also reflected in the LCR. Any surplus of 
liquid assets held at the legal entity may only be included in the Level 2 stock 
if those assets would be freely available to the consolidated (parent) entity in 
times of stress. 
 
25. 
For the purpose of calculating the LCR, if an eligible HQLA or eligible CLF  
liquid asset becomes ineligible (e.g. due to rating downgrade), an ADI may 
keep the asset in its stock of liquid assets for an additional 30 calendar days. 
This allows the ADI time to adjust its stock as needed or replace the asset. 
 
Level 2 consolidated banking group 
26. 
The LCR is to be met by an ADI on both a Level 1 and Level 2 basis. Where an 
ADI has a branch or subsidiary in an offshore jurisdiction, in calculating a 
subsidiary’s LCR the ADI must apply the requirements outlined in this 
Prudential Standard. The only exceptions are: 
 
(a) 
for retail and small and medium enterprise (SME) deposits, where the 
host supervisor’s outflow assumptions must be applied; and 
 
(b) 
alternative liquid assets, as provided for in the Basel Committee on 
Banking Supervision’s (Basel Committee) global framework for liquidity 
risk and allowed by the host supervisor, may be included. 
 
27. 
Where an ADI has a branch or subsidiary in an offshore jurisdiction that does 
not apply the Basel Committee’s global framework for liquidity risk, the cash 
flow assumptions outlined in this Prudential Standard must be applied in 
calculating the ADI’s Level 2 LCR. 
 
28. 
An ADI with a material banking subsidiary in another offshore jurisdiction 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment A - 21 
must ensure that the subsidiary maintains an LCR of at least 100 per cent. 
APRA may allow an ADI to include assets that are formally recognised as 
eligible liquid assets by the relevant offshore prudential regulator. 
 
29. 
For the calculation of the Level 2 LCR, an ADI must take into account 
restrictions on the transferability of liquid assets across borders. Excess 
liquidity is not to be recognised in the Level 2 LCR unless there is reasonable 
certainty about the availability of such liquidity. 
 
Net cash outflows 
30. 
Total net cash outflows represent the total expected cash outflows minus total 
expected cash inflows in the specified stress scenario for the subsequent 30 
calendar days. Total expected cash outflows are calculated by multiplying the 
outstanding balances of various categories or types of liabilities and off-
balance sheet commitments by the rates at which they are expected to run 
off or be drawn down as set out in Table 3 of paragraph 52 of this 
Attachment. Total expected cash inflows are calculated by multiplying the 
outstanding balances of various categories of contractual receivables by the 
rates (refer to paragraphs 53 to 65 of this Attachment) at which they are 
expected to flow in under the scenario, up to an aggregate cap of 75 per cent of 
total expected cash outflows. That is: 
 
 
31. 
An ADI must not double-count items. That is, if assets are included as part 
of the stock of HQLA (the numerator of the LCR), the associated cash inflows 
cannot also be counted as cash inflows. 
 
32. 
APRA will assess the suitability of an ADI’s assumptions made for those cash 
flow items that are derived. An ADI must be in a position to provide analysis 
and evidence to justify the assumptions. 
 
Where APRA determines that an ADI is actively using collateral swaps for 
liquidity management purposes, APRA may require that the ADI include in its 
LCR calculation the net cash flow impact of collateral swaps based on a 
method determined by APRA at that time. 
 
Total net cash outflows over the next 30 calendar days = Total 
expected cash outflows – Min {total expected cash inflows; 75 per 
cent of total expected cash outflows} 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment A - 22 
Cash outflows 
Retail deposit outflows 
33. 
For the purposes of the LCR, retail deposits are defined as deposits placed with 
an ADI by a natural person. Deposits from legal entities, sole proprietorships 
or partnerships are captured in wholesale deposit categories. Retail deposits 
include demand deposits and term deposits, unless otherwise excluded under 
the criteria set out in paragraphs 40 and 41 of this Attachment. 
 
34. 
Where a person places funds with an intermediary, which then places those 
funds with an ADI, the deposit with the ADI is considered to be a deposit from 
a financial institution unless, during the next 30 days: 
(a) 
the person retains all legal rights regarding the withdrawal or other 
movement of the funds; 
(b) 
the person exercises these rights in practice and cannot transfer these 
rights to the intermediary; 
(c) 
there is clear and prominent disclosure to the person that the funds will 
be placed with the ADI; and 
(d) 
the intermediary or an associated entity can neither make investment 
decisions on behalf of the person regarding the deposit, nor withdraw 
funds from the ADI in the absence of specific directions to do so from 
the person (other than miscellaneous items such as fees, expense 
reimbursements, taxes). 
If all of these conditions are satisfied, an ADI may treat the funds as if they are 
from the person. An ADI must be able to demonstrate how this treatment 
satisfies the conditions outlined in this paragraph. 
 
35. 
Retail deposits are divided into stable and less stable portions of funds, as 
described below. 
 
36. 
Stable deposits are the portion of deposits that are fully covered by the 
Financial Claims Scheme (or an effective government deposit insurance 
scheme) where: 
(a) 
the depositor has other established relationships with the ADI that make 
deposit withdrawal highly unlikely; or 
(b) 
the deposits are in transactional accounts (e.g. accounts where salaries 
are automatically credited). 
 
37. Less stable deposits are the portion of deposits that do not meet the 
requirements of stable deposits. 
 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment A - 23 
38. 
Certain types of deposits are considered more likely to be withdrawn in a time 
of stress. These include high-value deposits (i.e. deposits above any 
government deposit guarantee limit), deposits from customers who do not have 
established relationships with an ADI that would make the deposit withdrawal 
unlikely, deposits where the internet is integral to the design, marketing and 
usage of the account (on-line accounts) and deposits with promotional interest 
rates (heavily rate-driven). 
 
39. 
An ADI must assess each less stable account or product balance against the 
following scorecard: 
 
Table 1 – The scorecard 
 
Criteria 
Score 
Deposit balance is greater than any government deposit guarantee 
limit where it exists and, in its absence, where the deposit balance is 
greater than the equivalent of AUD 250,000 
2 
Deposit is an on-line account 
2 
Absence of an established customer relationship 
1 
Deposit is heavily rate-driven 
1 
 
The total score is then used to allocate the account or product deposit outflow as 
follows: 
 
Table 2 – Less stable deposit allocations 
 
Score 
Run-off rate 
0 – 2 
10 per cent 
3 or more 
25 per cent 
 
Fixed-term deposits 
40. 
Cash outflows related to fixed or term deposits with a residual maturity or 
withdrawal notice period of greater than 30 days will be excluded from LCR 
calculations if the depositor has no legal right to withdraw deposits within the 
30-day horizon of the LCR, or if early withdrawal results in a significant 
penalty that is materially greater than the loss of interest. 
 
41. 
If an ADI allows a depositor to withdraw such deposits despite a clause that 
says the depositor has no legal right to withdraw, the entire category of these 
funds must be treated as demand deposits. 
 
42. 
An ADI may allow depositors experiencing hardship to withdraw their term 
deposits without changing the treatment of the entire pool of deposits. The ADI 
must have a policy defining hardship. 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment A - 24 
 
Unsecured wholesale funding outflows 
43. 
For the purposes of the LCR, unsecured wholesale funding is defined as those 
liabilities and general obligations that are raised from non-natural persons (i.e. 
legal entities, including sole proprietorships and partnerships) and are not 
collateralised by legal rights to specifically designated assets owned by the 
borrowing institution in the case of bankruptcy, insolvency, liquidation or 
resolution. Obligations related to derivative contracts are explicitly excluded 
from this definition. 
 
44. 
Wholesale funding included in the LCR is defined as all funding that is 
callable within the LCR’s horizon of 30 days or that has its earliest possible 
contractual maturity date within this horizon (such as maturing term deposits 
and unsecured debt securities), as well as funding with an undetermined 
maturity. This must include all funding with options that are exercisable at the 
investor’s discretion within the 30-day horizon. Wholesale funding that is 
callable by the provider of the funds, subject to a contractually defined and 
binding notice period surpassing the 30-day horizon, may be excluded. 
 
45. 
Unsecured wholesale funding provided by SME customers may be treated as 
retail deposits where: 
(a) 
the deposits and other extensions of funds made by non-financial SME 
customers are managed as retail exposures and are generally considered 
as having similar liquidity risk characteristics to retail accounts; and 
(b) 
the total aggregated funding raised from an SME customer is less than 
AUD 2 million, (on a consolidated basis where applicable). 
 
Operational deposits 
 
46. 
For the purpose of the LCR, operational deposits are those where customers 
place, or leave, deposits with an ADI in order to facilitate their access and 
ability to use payment and settlement systems and otherwise make payments.  
Deposits may only be included as operational deposits if the customer has a 
substantive dependency on the ADI and the deposit is required for such 
activities. 
 
47. 
For the purpose of determining operational deposits, qualifying activities in this 
context refer to clearing, custody or cash management activities where the 
customer is reliant on the ADI to perform these services as an independent 
third-party intermediary in order to fulfil its normal banking activities over the 
next 30 days. These services must be provided to institutional customers under 
a legally binding agreement and the termination of such agreements must be 
subject either to a notice period of at least 30 days or to significant switching 
costs to be borne by the customer if the operational deposits are moved before 
30 days. 
 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment A - 25 
48. 
Qualifying operational deposits generated by such an activity are those where 
the deposits are: 
 
(a) 
by-products of the underlying services provided by the ADI; 
 
(b) 
not offered by the ADI in the wholesale market for the sole purpose of 
offering interest income; and 
 
(c) 
held in specifically designated accounts and priced without giving an 
economic incentive to the customer to leave excess funds in these 
accounts. 
 
49. 
Any excess balances that could be withdrawn without jeopardising these 
clearing, custody or cash management activities do not qualify as operational 
deposits. 
 
Liquidity facilities 
50. 
A liquidity facility is any committed, undrawn back-up facility that would be 
used to refinance the debt obligations of a customer in situations where such a 
customer is unable to rollover that debt in financial markets. The amount of any 
commitment to be treated as a liquidity facility is the amount of the outstanding 
debt issued by the customer (or proportionate share of a syndicated facility) 
maturing within a 30-day period that is backstopped by the facility. Any 
additional capacity of the facility is to be treated as a committed credit facility. 
General working capital facilities for corporate entities (e.g. revolving credit 
facilities in place for general corporate or working capital purposes) must not 
be classified as liquidity facilities, but as credit facilities. 
 
51. 
Notwithstanding paragraph 50 of this Attachment, any facilities provided to 
hedge funds, money market funds and special purpose funding vehicles, or 
other vehicles used to finance an ADI’s own assets, must be captured in their 
entirety as a liquidity facility to a financial institution. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment A - 26 
52. 
The following table sets out the run-off rates that must be applied to each 
liability and off-balance sheet cash outflow category. 
 
Table 3 – Cash outflow categories 
 
Run-off rate (%) 
Cash outflow category 
 
 
  
Retail  and qualifying SME deposits (refer to 
paragraphs 33 to 39 and 45)  
 
5 
 Stable deposits 
10 
 Less stable retail deposits 
25 
 Higher run-off less stable retail deposits 
 
Unsecured wholesale funding (refer to 
paragraphs 43 to 45) 
5 
 Operational deposit balances from all 
counterparties fully covered by deposit 
insurance 
25 
 Operational deposit balances from all 
counterparties not fully covered by deposit 
insurance 
 
 Non-operational deposits from non-
financial corporations, sovereigns, central 
banks, PSEs, MDBs and SMEs of greater 
than AUD 2m: 
20 
o where the entire amount is fully 
covered by deposit insurance 
40 
o where the entire amount is not fully 
covered by deposit insurance 
100 
 All other non-operational deposits 
100 
 Unsecured debt issuance 
 
Secured funding 
0 
 Secured funding transactions backed by 
HQLA1, with any counterparty  
0 
 Secured funding transactions with any 
counterparty backed by CLF-eligible debt 
securities, where the ADI pledging assets 
has a CLF with the RBA subject to the 
ADI’s CLF limit 
 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment A - 27 
 
Run-off rate (%) 
Cash outflow category 
 
Secured funding (continued) 
15 
 Secured funding transactions backed by 
HQLA2A, with any counterparty 
25 
 Secured funding transactions that are not 
eligible for inclusion in the 0 or 15 per cent 
categories above where the counterparties 
are domestic sovereigns, PSEs (but not the 
RBA) or MDBs with a risk weight of 20 
per cent or lower under APS 112 
 Secured funding transactions backed by 
RMBS eligible for inclusion as HQLA2B 
50 
 Secured funding transactions backed by 
other HQLA2B with any counterparty 
100 
 All other secured funding transactions 
 
Asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP), asset 
backed securities, covered bonds and other 
structured financing instruments/facilities 
100 
 Maturing transactions issued by the ADI 
itself 
100 
 Loss of funding on SPVs, conduits and 
structured investment vehicles due to 
inability to refinance maturing debt, 
embedded options and other potential loss 
of funding 
 
Increased liquidity needs related to derivatives 
and other transactions 
100 
 Derivatives cash outflows5 
100 
 Collateral that would need to be posted as 
a result of a downgrade of 3-notches of the 
ADI 
 
                                                 
5  
Expected derivative amounts payable and receivable are taken into account on a net basis by 
counterparty, only where a valid master netting agreement exists. Amounts must also be net of 
HQLA1 and HQLA2 collateral, to the extent that this collateral is not already counted in the 
stock of HQLA, in line with the principle in paragraph 31 of this Attachment that items cannot 
be double counted in the LCR. An ADI may net payments that are subject to industry wide 
netting agreements subject to approval from APRA. Cash flows arising from FX derivative 
transactions that involve a full exchange of principal amounts on a simultaneous basis (or within 
the same day) may be reflected as a net payable or receivable figure, even where those 
transactions are not covered by a master netting agreement. 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment A - 28 
 
Run-off rate (%) 
Cash outflow category 
 
Increased liquidity needs related to derivatives 
and other transactions (continued) 
100 
 Excess non-segregated collateral held by 
the ADI that could contractually be called 
at any time by the counterparty 
100 
 Contractually required collateral on 
transactions for which the counterparty has 
not yet demanded the collateral be posted 
100 
 Contracts that allow collateral substitution 
to non-HQLA– the amount of HQLA that 
may be substituted without the ADI’s 
consent 
100 per cent of the 
largest absolute net 30-
day collateral flow 
realised in the past 24 
months6 
 Collateral outflows due to market 
valuation changes on derivative 
transactions and other transactions 
20 
 Valuation changes on posted non-HQLA1 
collateral securing derivatives and other 
transactions 
 
Committed facilities 
 
 For the undrawn portion of committed 
credit and liquidity facilities: 
5 
o to retail and SME customers 
 
o to non-financial corporate, 
sovereigns and central banks, 
PSEs: 
10 
 credit facilities 
30 
 liquidity facilities 
 40 
o to banks and other ADIs subject to 
prudential supervision 
 
 
 
                                                 
6  
An ADI may, in certain circumstances, apply to APRA for approval to use an alternative 
method to calculate collateral outflows due to market valuation changes on derivative 
transactions. 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment A - 29 
Run-off rate (%) 
Cash outflow category 
 
Committed facilities (continued) 
 
 For the undrawn portion of committed 
credit and liquidity facilities: 
  
o to other financial institutions: 
40 
 credit facilities 
100 
 liquidity facilities 
100 
 Other legal entity customers 
 
Other contingent funding obligations 
5 
 Revocable credit and liquidity facilities 
Average of actual 
monthly net outflows in 
a recent 12-month 
period 
 Trade finance related obligations 
50 per cent of the 
average of actual 
monthly net outflows in 
a recent 12-month 
period 
 Guarantees and letters of credit other than 
trade finance related obligations 
10 per cent for 
short-term securities 
and 5 per cent for 
long-term securities 
unless otherwise agreed 
with APRA 
 Buybacks of domestic Australian debt 
securities 
5 
 Non-contractual obligations related to 
structured products and managed funds  
To be set by the ADI 
unless APRA 
determines the rate for 
the ADI 
 Issuers with an affiliated dealer or market 
maker  
To be set by the ADI 
unless APRA 
determines the rate for 
the ADI 
 Other non-contractual contingent funding 
obligations 
100 
Other contractual cash outflows 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment A - 30 
Cash inflows 
53. 
When considering its available cash inflows, an ADI must only include 
contractual inflows from outstanding exposures that are fully performing and 
for which it has no reason to expect a default within the 30-day time horizon. 
Where APRA is of the view that an ADI is overly reliant on cash inflows from 
one or a limited number of wholesale counterparties, APRA may set an 
alternative limit on the level of cash inflows that may be included in the LCR 
in consultation with the ADI. 
 
Secured lending, including reverse repos and securities borrowing 
54. 
An ADI must assume that maturing reverse repurchase or securities 
borrowing agreements secured by HQLA1 will be rolled over and will not give 
rise to any cash inflows (zero per cent). Maturing reverse repurchase or 
securities borrowing agreements secured by other HQLA are to be modelled 
as cash inflows, as outlined in Table 4 below, due to the reduction of funds 
extended against the collateral. Collateralised loans extended to customers for 
the purpose of taking leveraged trading positions are to be modelled with a 
50 per cent cash inflow from contractual inflows made against non-HQLA1 
or non-HQLA2. 
 
55. 
As an exception to paragraph 54 of this Attachment, if the collateral obtained 
through reverse repo, securities borrowing or collateral swaps, which matures 
within the 30-day horizon, is re-used (i.e. rehypothecated) and is tied up for 
30 days or longer to cover short positions, an ADI must assume that such 
reverse repo or securities borrowing arrangements will be rolled over and will 
not give rise to any cash inflows (zero per cent), reflecting its need to continue 
to cover the short position or to re-purchase the relevant securities. 
 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment A - 31 
Table 4 – Maturing secured lending inflow rates 
 
 
Maturing secured 
lending backed by 
the following asset 
category 
 
Inflow rate 
(%) 
 (if collateral is not 
used to cover short 
positions) 
 
Inflow rate 
(%) 
 (if collateral is used 
to cover short 
positions) 
HQLA1 
0 
0 
CLF-eligible debt 
securities, where the 
ADI receiving assets 
has a CLF with the 
RBA subject to the 
ADI’s CLF limit 
0 
0 
HQLA2A 
15 
0 
HQLA2B (eligible  
residential mortgage-
backed securities) 
25 
0 
Other HQLA2B 
50 
0 
Margin lending backed 
by securities that are 
not HQLA1,  HQLA2 
or CLF-eligible 
securities 
50 
0 
All other collateral 
100 
0 
 
Lines of credit 
56. 
Lines of credit, liquidity facilities and other contingent funding facilities that an 
ADI holds at other institutions for its own purposes receive a zero per cent 
inflow rate. 
 
57. 
APRA may allow recognition of access to head office funds via a committed 
funding facility if the ADI is a foreign ADI. In such instances, the head office 
committed funding facility must meet all of the following criteria: 
 
(a) 
the committed funding facility is an irrevocable commitment from the 
branch’s head office and is appropriately documented;  and 
 
(b) 
the committed funding facility is quantified. 
 
This paragraph does not apply to a foreign ADI that is part of a group that also 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment A - 32 
has a locally-incorporated banking subsidiary in Australia. 
 
58. 
A foreign ADI may meet up to 50 per cent of its LCR requirement with a head 
office committed funding facility. The remaining liquidity requirement must be 
met with eligible liquid assets as detailed in this Attachment. 
Inflows by counterparty 
59. 
All inflows are to be taken only at the latest possible date, based on the 
contractual rights available to counterparties. Inflows from loans that have no 
specific maturity are not included, with the exception of minimum payments of 
principal, fee or interest associated with an open maturity loan. 
 
Retail and SME inflows 
 
60. 
An ADI is assumed to receive all fully performing contractual inflows from 
retail and SME7 customers. At the same time, however, an ADI is assumed to 
continue to extend loans to retail and SME customers, at a rate of 50 per cent of 
contractual inflows. This results in a net inflow rate of 50 per cent of the 
contractual amount. 
 
Other wholesale inflows 
 
61. 
An ADI is assumed to receive all fully performing contractual wholesale cash 
inflows. In addition, an ADI is assumed to continue to extend loans to 
wholesale clients, at a rate of zero per cent of inflows for financial institutions 
and central banks, and 50 per cent for all others, including non-financial 
corporates, sovereigns, PSEs and MDBs. This will result in an inflow rate of: 
 
(a) 
100 per cent from financial institution and central bank counterparties; 
and 
 
(b) 
50 per cent for other entities. 
 
Inflows from maturing securities not included in the stock of HQLA receive an 
inflow rate of 100 per cent. 
 
Operational deposits  
 
62. 
A zero per cent inflow rate applies to deposits held at other financial 
institutions for operational purposes. 
 
63. 
Likewise, the depositing ADI must not count any inflow for deposits held at 
the centralised institution in a cooperative banking network, which are 
assumed to stay at the centralised institution. These funds will receive a zero 
                                                 
7  
Where the definition for an SME customer in paragraph 45 of this Attachment A cannot be 
applied due to the absence of liability products, the definition in paragraph 47 of Prudential 
Standard APS 113 Capital Adequacy: Internal Ratings-based Approach to Credit Risk can be 
used instead. 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment A - 33 
per cent inflow rate. 
 
Other cash inflows 
Derivatives cash inflows8 
64. 
These derivative items receive an inflow rate of 100 per cent. 
Other contractual cash inflows 
 
65. 
Other contractual cash inflows receive an inflow rate of 100 per cent. Cash 
inflows related to non-financial revenues are not taken into account in the 
calculation of the net cash outflows for the purposes of the LCR. 
 
                                                 
8  
The treatment in footnote 5 also applies here. 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment B - 34 
Attachment B 
Minimum liquidity holdings approach 
 
1. 
For the purpose of this Attachment, liabilities are defined as total on-balance 
sheet liabilities and irrevocable commitments, except where approved for a 
prudential purpose by APRA. 
2. 
For the purpose of the MLH requirement, liquid assets must be free from 
encumbrances, except where approved for a prudential purpose by APRA, and 
include: 
(a) 
notes and coin and settlement funds; 
(b) 
Commonwealth Government and semi-government securities; 
(c) 
debt securities guaranteed by the Australian Government, or foreign 
sovereign governments; 
(d) 
debt securities issued by supranationals and foreign governments; 
(e) 
bank bills, certificates of deposits (CDs) and debt securities issued by 
ADIs; 
(f) 
deposits (at call and any other deposits readily convertible into cash 
within two business days) held with other ADIs net of placements by 
other ADIs; and 
(g) 
any other securities approved by APRA. 
3. 
All debt securities must be eligible for repurchase agreement with the RBA and 
must not be subordinated. 
 
4. 
An MLH ADI must ensure it has the operational capacity to liquidate any 
securities held as liquid assets within two business days. 
 
5. 
In order to ensure that the MLH requirement is not breached, absent a situation 
of financial stress, an ADI must set a trigger ratio above its MLH requirement 
and must ensure that it manages its liquidity in accordance with its trigger ratio. 
 
6. 
An ADI must inform APRA immediately when it becomes aware that its liquid 
assets may fall below its MLH requirement and advise APRA of the remedial 
action taken or planned to restore its liquidity position above its MLH 
requirement. 
 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment C - 35  
 
Attachment C  
Net stable funding ratio  
 
1. 
The objective of the NSFR is to reduce the funding risk of an ADI over a one-
year time horizon by requiring an ADI to fund its activities with sufficiently 
stable sources of funding in order to mitigate the risk of future funding stress. 
2. 
The NSFR has two components: 
(a) 
available stable funding (ASF); and 
(b) 
required stable funding (RSF). 
3. 
The NSFR is calculated as: 
Available stable funding 
Required stable funding 
4. 
An ADI must maintain an appropriate buffer above its required NSFR under 
this Prudential Standard, in line with its liquidity risk tolerance, at all times. 
 
5. 
For the purposes of this Attachment, the meanings and definitions in 
Attachment A apply unless otherwise indicated. 
 
Available stable funding (ASF) 
6. 
ASF is the portion of capital and liabilities expected to be reliably provided over 
a one-year time horizon, and is measured based on the broad characteristics of 
the relative stability of an ADI’s funding sources, including the contractual 
maturity of its liabilities and the differences in propensity of different types of 
funding providers to withdraw their funds. 
7. 
An ADI must calculate its ASF as follows: 
(a) 
assign the carrying value9 of the ADI’s capital and liabilities to the 
relevant ASF category (refer to paragraphs 11 to 15 of this Attachment); 
(b) 
multiply the amount assigned to each liability category by the 
corresponding ASF factor to obtain a weighted amount; and 
(c) 
sum the weighted amounts. 
                                                 
9  
The carrying value represents the amount of a liability or equity instrument before application of 
any regulatory deductions, filters or other adjustments. 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment C - 36  
 
Maturity of funding 
8. 
In order to determine the maturity of a funding instrument with an option or a 
deposit with a withdrawal notice period, an ADI must, for the purposes of the 
NSFR, assume the maturity date as being the earliest date at which the funds 
may be redeemed. For long-dated liabilities, only that portion of cash flows 
falling on or after the six-month and one-year time horizons may be treated as 
having an effective residual maturity of six months or more and one year or 
more, respectively. 
Calculation of derivative liability amounts 
9. 
An ADI must calculate its derivative liabilities based on the replacement cost 
for derivative contracts (obtained by marking-to-market) where the contract has 
a negative value. When an eligible bilateral netting contract is in place that 
meets the conditions specified in paragraphs 7 to 12 of Attachment J of APS 
112 and paragraphs 8 and 9 of the annex of the Basel III leverage ratio 
framework and disclosure requirements,10 the replacement cost for the set of 
derivative exposures covered by the contract will be the net replacement cost. 
 
10. 
In calculating NSFR derivative liabilities, an ADI must deduct any collateral 
posted in the form of variation margin in connection with derivative contracts, 
regardless of the asset type, from the negative replacement cost amount.11,12 
 
Liabilities and capital receiving a 100 per cent ASF factor 
11. 
The following liabilities and capital instruments must be assigned a 100 per cent 
ASF factor: 
 
(a) 
the total amount of regulatory capital, before the application of regulatory 
adjustments, as defined in Prudential Standard APS 111 Capital 
Adequacy: Measurement of Capital (APS 111), excluding the proportion 
of Tier 2 instruments with a residual maturity of less than one year; 
(b) 
the total amount of any capital instrument not included in paragraph 11(a) 
that has an effective residual maturity of one year or more, but excluding 
any instruments with explicit or embedded options that, if exercised, 
would reduce the expected maturity to less than one year; and 
(c) 
the total amount of secured and unsecured borrowings and liabilities, 
including term deposits with an effective residual maturity of one year or 
more. Cash flows due in less than one year that arise from liabilities with 
                                                 
10  
Refer to Basel III leverage ratio framework and disclosure requirements, January 2014, Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision as it exists at 12 January 2014. 
11  
NSFR derivative liabilities = (derivative liabilities) – (total collateral posted as variation margin 
on derivative liabilities). 
12  
When determining its RSF, an ADI must not include an asset on its balance sheet associated 
with collateral posted as variation margin where the asset is deducted from the replacement cost 
amount of a derivative contract for the purposes of the NSFR. 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment C - 37  
 
a final maturity greater than one year are not eligible for the 100 per cent 
ASF factor. 
Liabilities receiving a 95 per cent ASF factor 
12. 
The following liabilities must be assigned a 95 per cent ASF factor: 
 
(a) 
liabilities classified as stable13 demand deposits and term deposits with a 
residual maturity of less than one year provided by retail and SME 
customers;14 and 
(b) 
intermediated deposits that meet the requirements of paragraph 34 of 
Attachment A for treatment as stable retail deposits and where the 
intermediary cannot replace the ADI unless it provides at least 12-months’ 
notice. 
Liabilities receiving a 90 per cent ASF factor 
13. 
The following liabilities must be assigned a 90 per cent ASF factor: 
 
(a) 
liabilities classified as less stable15 demand deposits and term deposits 
with a residual maturity of less than one year provided by retail and SME 
customers; and 
(b) 
intermediated deposits, including member-directed superannuation 
deposits, that meet the requirements of paragraph 34 of Attachment A for 
treatment as less stable retail deposits and where the intermediary cannot 
replace the ADI unless it provides at least 12-months’ notice. 
Liabilities receiving a 50 per cent ASF factor 
14. 
The following liabilities must be assigned a 50 per cent ASF factor: 
 
(a) 
secured and unsecured funding with a residual maturity of less than one 
year provided by non-financial corporate customers; 
(b) 
operational deposits;16 
(c) 
superannuation fund deposits that meet the definition of operational 
deposits;17 
(d) 
intermediated deposits, including member-directed superannuation 
deposits, that meet the requirements of paragraph 34 of Attachment A and 
                                                 
13  
Refer to paragraph 36 of Attachment A. 
14  
Refer to paragraph 33 of Attachment A. Also refer to paragraph 45 and footnote 9 of 
Attachment A for the definition of SME. 
15  
Refer to paragraph 37 of Attachment A. 
16   
Refer to paragraphs 46 to 49 of Attachment A. 
17  
Refer to footnote 16. 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment C - 38  
 
where the intermediary cannot replace the ADI unless it provides at least 
six months’ notice; 
(e) 
funding with a residual maturity of less than one year from sovereigns, 
PSEs and MDBs and national development banks; and 
(f) 
other funding, secured and unsecured, not included in the categories above 
with a residual maturity of between six months to less than one year, 
including funding from central banks and financial institutions. 
Liabilities receiving a zero per cent ASF factor 
15. 
The following liabilities must be assigned a zero per cent ASF factor: 
 
(a) 
all other liabilities and equity categories not included in paragraphs 11 to 
14 of this Attachment, including other funding with a residual maturity of 
less than six months from central banks and financial institutions;18 
(b) 
other liabilities without a stated maturity including short positions and 
open maturity positions, except for: 
(i) 
deferred tax liabilities, which must be treated according to the 
nearest possible date on which such liabilities could be realised; and 
 
(ii) 
minority interests, which must be treated according to the term of 
the instrument, usually in perpetuity. 
 
These liabilities are assigned a 100 per cent ASF factor if the effective 
maturity is one year or greater, or 50 per cent, if the effective maturity is 
between six months and less than one year; 
(c) 
if NSFR derivative liabilities are greater than NSFR derivative assets, then 
NSFR derivative liabilities calculated in accordance with paragraphs 9 
and 10 of this Attachment net of NSFR derivative assets as calculated in 
accordance with paragraphs 27 and 28 of this Attachment;19 and 
(d) 
trade date payables arising from the purchase of financial instruments, 
foreign currencies and commodities that (i) are expected to settle within 
the standard settlement cycle or period that is customary for the relevant 
                                                 
18  
Subject to APRA’s approval, deposits between ADIs within the same cooperative network may 
be excluded from liabilities receiving a zero per cent ASF provided they are either (a) required 
by law to be placed at the central organisation and are legally constrained within the 
cooperative network as minimum deposit requirements; or (b) in the context of common task 
sharing and legal, statutory or contractual arrangements, so long as the ADI that has received 
the monies and the ADI that has deposited participate in the same institutional network’s mutual 
protection scheme against illiquidity and insolvency of its members. Such deposits may be 
assigned an ASF up to the RSF factor assigned by regulation for the same deposits to the 
depositing bank, not to exceed 85 per cent. 
 
19  
ASF = 0 per cent x MAX ((NSFR derivative liabilities – NSFR derivative assets), 0). 
 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment C - 39  
 
exchange or type of transaction or (ii) have failed to, but are still expected 
to, settle. 
Required stable funding (RSF) 
16. 
RSF is the minimum amount of stable funding an ADI is required to hold and is 
a function of the liquidity characteristics and residual maturities of the various 
assets held by an ADI including off-balance sheet (OBS) exposures. 
 
17. 
An ADI must calculate its RSF as follows: 
 
(a) 
assign the ADI’s assets, at carrying value, and OBS exposures to the 
relevant RSF category (refer to paragraphs 29 to 37 of this Attachment); 
(b) 
multiply the amount assigned to each asset category and OBS exposure 
(or potential liquidity exposure) by the corresponding RSF factor; and 
(c) 
sum the weighted amounts.20 
18. 
An ADI must allocate assets to the appropriate RSF factor based on the asset’s 
residual maturity or liquidity value as detailed in this attachment. 
19. 
For the purposes of determining its RSF, an ADI must include financial 
instruments, foreign currencies and commodities for which a purchase order has 
been executed. An ADI may exclude financial instruments, foreign currencies 
and commodities for which a sales order has been executed, even if such 
transactions are not reflected in the ADI’s balance sheet under a settlement-date 
accounting model provided that (i) such transactions are not reflected as 
derivatives or secured financing transactions on the ADI’s balance sheet and (ii) 
the effects of such transactions will be reflected in the ADI’s balance sheet 
when settled. 
Maturity of assets 
20. 
To determine the maturity of an asset, an ADI must, for the purposes of the 
NSFR, assume the maturity date as being the latest possible date at which the 
asset may mature. An ADI must assume that for an asset with an option to 
extend maturity, the option will be exercised. 
 
21. 
Where an asset does not have a defined maturity or the maturity is subject to 
periodic review, an ADI must, for NSFR purposes, classify the asset as having a 
residual maturity of greater than or equal to one year and assign the relevant 
RSF factor on this basis. 
                                                 
20  
For the purposes of calculating the NSFR, HQLA is defined as all HQLA without regard to 
LCR operational requirements and LCR caps on HQLA2 and HQLA2B that may otherwise 
limit the ability of some HQLA to be included as eligible HQLA in calculation of the LCR. 
HQLA is defined in paragraphs 6 to 29 of Attachment A and operational requirements is defined  
in  paragraphs 22 to 29 of Attachment A. For the purposes of calculating the NSFR, assets 
include 20 per cent of derivative liabilities calculated in accordance with paragraph 9 of this 
Attachment. 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment C - 40  
 
 
22. 
For an amortising loan, or a loan with minimum contractual payments, that 
portion that falls due within the one-year time horizon may be included in the 
less than one year residual maturity category. 
 
Encumbered assets 
23. 
Assets on an ADI’s balance sheet that are encumbered21 for one year or more 
must be assigned a 100 per cent RSF factor. Assets encumbered for a period of 
between six months and less than one year that would, if unencumbered, receive 
an RSF factor lower than or equal to 50 per cent must be assigned a 50 per cent 
RSF factor. Assets encumbered for between six months and less than one year 
that would, if unencumbered, receive an RSF factor higher than 50 per cent 
must be assigned the higher RSF factor. Where assets have less than six months 
remaining in the encumbrance period, the same RSF factor is applied as that for 
an equivalent asset that is unencumbered. 
 
24. 
Where an asset is encumbered for exceptional22 central bank liquidity 
operations, the asset may be given a lower RSF factor if approval is sought from 
APRA and APRA agrees to the lower RSF factor. 
 
Secured financing transactions 
25. 
For the purposes of determining its NSFR, an ADI must exclude from its assets 
amount, securities borrowed in securities financing transactions (for example, 
reverse repos and collateral swaps) where the ADI does not retain beneficial 
ownership of the securities. Conversely, an ADI must include securities lent in 
securities financing transactions where the ADI retains beneficial ownership. 
An ADI must not include securities received through collateral swaps if those 
securities do not appear on the ADI’s balance sheet. If an ADI has encumbered 
securities in repos or other securities financing transactions, but retains 
beneficial ownership and the assets remain on the ADI’s balance sheet, the ADI 
must allocate the security to the appropriate RSF category. 
 
26. 
An ADI may net securities financing transactions with a single counterparty 
when calculating its NSFR, provided that the netting conditions set out in 
paragraph 22 of Attachment D of Prudential Standard APS 110 Capital 
Adequacy (APS 110) are met. 
 
Calculation of derivative asset amounts 
27. 
An ADI must calculate the value of derivative assets based on the replacement 
cost for derivative contracts (obtained by marking-to-market) where the contract 
has a positive value. When an eligible bilateral netting agreement is in place that 
                                                 
21  
Encumbered assets include but are not limited to assets backing securities or covered bonds and 
assets pledged in securities financing transactions or collateral swaps. 
22  
In general, exceptional central bank liquidity operations are considered to be non-standard, 
temporary operations conducted by a central bank in order to achieve its mandate in a period of 
market-wide financial stress and/or exceptional macroeconomic circumstances. 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment C - 41  
 
meets the conditions in paragraphs 7 to 12 of Attachment J of APS 112 and 
paragraphs 8 and 9 of the annex of the Basel III leverage ratio framework and 
disclosure requirements,23 the replacement cost for the set of derivative 
exposures covered by the contract must be calculated as the net replacement 
cost. 
 
28. 
When calculating NSFR derivative assets, collateral received in connection with 
derivative contracts must not offset the positive replacement cost amount, 
regardless of whether or not netting is permitted under an ADI’s operational 
accounting or risk-based framework, unless it is received in the form of a cash 
variation margin and meets the conditions specified in paragraph 13 of 
Attachment D to APS 110 and is in the same currency as the currency of 
settlement24 of the derivative contract. Any remaining balance sheet liability 
associated with variation margin received that does not meet the criteria above 
or initial margin received must not offset derivative assets and must be assigned 
a zero per cent ASF factor. 
 
Assets assigned a zero per cent RSF factor 
29. 
An ADI must assign a zero per cent RSF factor to the following assets: 
 
(a) 
notes and coins immediately available to meet obligations; 
(b) 
central bank reserves and balances;25 
(c) 
all claims on central banks with a residual maturity of less than six 
months; and 
(d) 
trade date receivables arising from the sale of financial instruments, 
foreign currencies and commodities that (i) are expected to settle within 
the standard settlement cycle or period for the relevant exchange or type 
of transaction or (ii) have failed to, but are still expected to, settle. 
Assets assigned a five per cent RSF factor 
30. 
An ADI must assign a five per cent RSF factor to the following assets. They 
include unencumbered HQLA1 assets, but exclude assets receiving a zero per 
cent RSF factor as specified in paragraph 29 of this Attachment: 
 
(a) 
marketable securities representing claims on or claims guaranteed by 
sovereigns, central banks, PSEs, the BIS, the IMF, the ECB and EU or 
                                                 
23  
Basel III leverage ratio framework and disclosure requirements, January 2014, Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision as it exists at 12 January 2014. 
24  
Refer to question 2.1 of Basel III leverage ratio framework and disclosure requirements, 
January 2014, Basel Committee on Banking Supervision as it exists at 12 January 2014. 
25   
APRA may impose a higher RSF factor after discussing and agreeing with the relevant central 
bank and taking into consideration whether the reserve requirement must be satisfied at all times 
and the extent to which the reserve requirement in a particular jurisdiction exists over a longer-
term horizon and therefore requires associated stable funding.  
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment C - 42  
 
MDBs and that are assigned a zero per cent risk weight under Attachment 
A of APS 112; and 
(b) 
certain non-zero per cent risk-weighted sovereign or central bank debt 
securities as specified in paragraphs 9(d) and (e) of Attachment A. 
Assets assigned a 10 per cent RSF factor 
31. 
An ADI must assign a 10 per cent RSF factor to unencumbered loans to 
financial institutions with a residual maturity of less than six months, where the 
loan is secured against HQLA1 assets as defined in paragraph 9 of Attachment 
A, provided the ADI has the ability to freely rehypothecate the received 
collateral for the life of the loan. 
 
32. 
An ADI may assign an RSF factor of 10 per cent to: 
 
(a) 
CLF-eligible third-party debt securities, other jurisdictions’ ALA and 
assets recognised as eligible liquid assets by a host supervisor that APRA 
allows to be included in the numerator of the LCR. The 10 per cent RSF 
factor may only be applied to the lower of the carrying value of the assets 
and the amount of the CLF that may be included in the numerator of the 
ADI’s LCR as allowed for under this Prudential Standard; and 
(b) 
self-securitised assets, eligible as CLF collateral. The maximum amount 
eligible for the 10 per cent RSF factor is the ADI’s CLF less eligible third-
party debt securities held as collateral for the CLF. 
Assets assigned a 15 per cent RSF factor 
33. 
An ADI must assign a 15 per cent RSF factor to the following assets: 
 
(a) 
unencumbered HQLA2A assets as defined in paragraph 10 of Attachment 
A; and 
(b) 
all other unencumbered loans to financial institutions with a residual 
maturity of less than six months not included in paragraph 31 of this 
Attachment. 
Assets assigned a 50 per cent RSF factor 
34. 
An ADI must assign a 50 per cent RSF factor to the following assets: 
 
(a) 
unencumbered HQLA2B assets as defined in paragraph 12 of Attachment 
A; 
(b) 
any HQLA as defined in Attachment A that are encumbered for a period 
of between six months and less than one year; 
(c) 
all loans to financial institutions and central banks with a residual maturity 
of between six months and less than one year;  
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment C - 43  
 
(d) 
operational deposits held at other ADIs that are subject to a 50 per cent 
ASF factor in paragraph 14(b) of this Attachment; 
(e) 
Australian equities, other than financial institutions or associated entities 
(as defined in section 50AAA of the Corporations Act 2001), that trade on 
the Australian Securities Exchange (ASX) and form part of the 
S&P/ASX200 stock index; and 
(f) 
all other non-HQLA not included in the above categories that have a 
residual maturity of less than one year, including loans to non-financial 
corporate clients, loans to retail customers (i.e. natural persons) and SME 
customers and loans to sovereigns and PSEs. 
Assets assigned a 65 per cent RSF factor 
35. 
An ADI must assign a 65 per cent RSF factor to the following assets: 
 
(a) 
unencumbered residential mortgages with a residual maturity of one year 
or more that are subject to or would qualify for a 35 per cent risk weight 
under APS 112; and 
(b) 
other unencumbered loans not included in the above categories, excluding 
loans to financial institutions, with a residual maturity of one year or more 
that are subject to or would qualify for a 35 per cent or lower risk weight 
under APS 112. 
Assets assigned an 85 per cent RSF factor 
36. 
An ADI must assign an 85 per cent RSF factor to the following assets: 
 
(a) 
cash, securities or other assets, whether on- or off-balance sheet, posted as 
an initial margin for derivative contracts and cash or other assets provided 
to contribute to the default fund of a central counterparty (CCP).26 Where 
securities or other assets posted as an initial margin for derivative 
contracts would otherwise receive a higher RSF factor, they must be 
assigned the higher factor; 
(b) 
other unencumbered performing loans that do not qualify for a 35 per cent 
risk or lower weight under APS 112 and have residual maturities of one 
year or more, excluding loans to financial institutions; 27 
(c) 
unencumbered securities with a remaining maturity of one year or more 
and exchange-traded equities, that are not in default and do not qualify as 
HQLA; and 
                                                 
26  
An initial margin posted on behalf of a customer, where an ADI does not guarantee performance 
of the third party, is exempt from this requirement. 
27  
Whether a loan is performing or non-performing is determined by reference to Prudential 
Standard APS 220 Credit Quality. Non-performing loans are considered to be those that are past 
due or impaired. 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment C - 44  
 
(d) 
physical traded commodities, including gold. 
Assets assigned a 100 per cent RSF factor 
37. 
An ADI must assign a 100 per cent RSF factor to the following assets: 
 
(a) 
all assets that are encumbered for a period of one year or more;28 
(b) 
NSFR derivative assets calculated in accordance with paragraphs 27 and 
28 of this Attachment net of NSFR derivative liabilities calculated in 
accordance with paragraphs 9 and 10 of this Attachment, if NSFR 
derivative assets are greater than NSFR derivative liabilities;29 
(c) 
all other assets not included in the above categories, including non-
performing loans, loans to financial institutions with a residual maturity of 
one year or more, non-exchange-traded equities, fixed assets, items 
deducted from regulatory capital (as defined in APS 111), retained 
interest, insurance assets, subsidiary interests and defaulted securities; and 
(d) 
20 per cent of derivative liabilities (i.e. negative replacement cost 
amounts) as calculated according to paragraph 9 of this Attachment 
(before deducting any variation margin posted). 
 
Interdependent assets and liabilities 
38. 
APRA may determine that certain asset and liability items, on the basis of 
contractual arrangements, are interdependent such that the liability cannot fall 
due while the asset remains on the balance sheet, the principal payment flows 
from the asset cannot be used other than for repaying the liability, and the 
liability cannot be used to fund other assets. 
 
39. 
For the purposes of paragraph 38, APRA will only make a determination, on a 
case-by-case basis, in exceptional circumstances. As part of any determination, 
an ADI must, at a minimum, be able to demonstrate that the criteria in 
paragraph 40 are met in full. 
 
40. 
If APRA determines asset and liability items to be interdependent in accordance 
with paragraph 38 of this Attachment then APRA may, at its discretion, adjust 
the RSF and ASF factors relating to those asset and liability items to zero per 
cent, subject to the following criteria: 
 
(a) 
the individual interdependent asset and liability items are clearly 
identifiable; 
(b) 
the maturity and principal amount of both the liability and its 
interdependent asset are the same; 
                                                 
28  
For a non-maturity reverse repo, an RSF of 100 per cent applies, unless an ADI is able to 
demonstrate to APRA’s satisfaction that it would effectively have a different maturity period. 
29  
RSF = 100 per cent x MAX ((NSFR derivative assets – NSFR derivative liabilities), 0). 
 
 
 
 
January 2018 
 
 
 
APS 210 Attachment C - 45  
 
(c) 
the ADI is acting solely as a pass-through unit to channel the funding 
received 
(the 
interdependent 
liability) 
into 
the 
corresponding 
interdependent asset; and 
(d) 
the counterparties for each pair of interdependent liabilities and assets are 
not the same. 
Off-balance sheet exposures 
41. 
An ADI must apply the RSF factor to the RSF category in Table 1 for the OBS 
exposure categories in the Table. 
 
Table 1 – OBS exposure categories 
 
RSF factor (%) 
RSF category 
5 
Irrevocable and conditionally revocable credit and 
liquidity facilities to any client 
1 
Unconditionally revocable credit and liquidity facilities 
 
42. 
An ADI must apply an RSF factor of 100 per cent to trade finance-related 
obligations and guarantees and letters of credit unrelated to trade finance 
obligations using the actual net outflows for these obligations in the most recent 
12-month period. 
 


--- End of file: APS 210 Liquidity.txt ---

 
 
January 2021 
 
APS 220 - 1 
 
 
Prudential Standard APS 220 
Credit Risk Management 
Objectives and key requirements of this Prudential 
Standard 
This Prudential Standard requires an authorised deposit-taking institution to 
implement a credit risk management framework that is appropriate to its size, 
business mix and complexity. 
The key requirements of this Prudential Standard are that an authorised deposit-
taking institution must maintain: 
 
an appropriate credit risk appetite statement and credit risk management 
strategy that reflects its credit risk appetite and credit risk profile; 
 
prudent policies and processes to identify, measure, monitor, report and 
control or mitigate credit risk over the full credit life-cycle; 
 
sound credit assessment and approval criteria, including for the 
comprehensive assessment of a borrower’s repayment capacity; 
 
an appropriate system for the ongoing administration of its credit portfolio; 
 
prudent policies and processes for the early identification and management of 
problem exposures, including non-performing and restructured exposures and 
other transactions; and 
 
appropriate credit risk practices, including an effective system of internal 
control, to consistently determine adequate provisions in accordance with the 
authorised deposit-taking institution’s stated policies and processes and 
Australian Accounting Standards. 
 
 
 
 
January 2021 
 
APS 220 - 2 
Table of Contents  
 
Authority ........................................................................................................... 3 
Application ....................................................................................................... 3 
Scope ............................................................................................................... 3 
Interpretation .................................................................................................... 3 
Definitions ........................................................................................................ 4 
Adjustments and exclusions............................................................................. 6 
Previous exercise of discretion ........................................................................ 6 
Credit risk management framework ................................................................. 6 
Outsourcing...................................................................................................... 7 
Large exposures and associations with related entities ................................... 7 
Credit risk appetite ........................................................................................... 7 
Credit risk management strategy ..................................................................... 7 
The role of the Board and senior management ................................................ 8 
Credit risk policies and processes .................................................................... 9 
Credit origination ............................................................................................ 10 
Credit assessment and approval process ...................................................... 11 
Credit administration, measurement and monitoring ...................................... 14 
Controls over credit risk ................................................................................. 16 
Classification of exposures and provisions .................................................... 17 
Non-performing exposures ............................................................................ 17 
Restructured exposures ................................................................................. 19 
Credit risk and accounting for expected credit losses .................................... 20 
Prescribed provisioning .................................................................................. 20 
Supervisory limits ........................................................................................... 21 
Adequacy of credit risk management and provisions ..................................... 21 
Special purpose engagements....................................................................... 21 
Attachment A – Collateral valuation ............................................................... 22 
Attachment B – Prescribed provisioning ........................................................ 26 
 
 
 
January 2021 
 
APS 220 - 3 
Authority 
1. 
This Prudential Standard is made under section 11AF of the Banking Act 1959 
(Banking Act).  
Application 
2. 
This Prudential Standard applies to all authorised deposit-taking institutions 
(ADIs) other than purchased payment facility providers (PPF providers), 
subject to paragraph 3. 
3. 
Foreign ADIs must comply with the provisions in this Prudential Standard with 
the exception of paragraphs 23, 74 and 93 as relates to the quantitative aspects of 
capital adequacy. 
4. 
The obligations imposed by this Prudential Standard on, or in relation to, foreign 
ADIs only apply in relation to their Australian business. 
5. 
A reference to an ADI in this Prudential Standard, unless otherwise indicated, is 
a reference to: 
(a) 
an ADI on a Level 1 basis; and 
(b) 
a group of which an ADI is a member on a Level 2 basis. 
6. 
If an ADI to which this Prudential Standard applies is: 
(a) 
the holding company for a group, the ADI must ensure that the 
requirements in this Prudential Standard are met on a Level 2 basis, where 
applicable; or 
(b) 
a subsidiary of an authorised non-operating holding company (authorised 
NOHC), the authorised NOHC must ensure that the requirements in this 
Prudential Standard are met on a Level 2 basis, where applicable. 
Scope 
7. 
This Prudential Standard applies to all activities of the ADI that give rise to credit 
risk, except exposures that have been securitised, transferred or originated into 
securitisation vehicles that meet APRA’s operational requirements for regulatory 
capital relief in Prudential Standard APS 120 Securitisation (APS 120). 
Interpretation  
8. 
Terms that are defined in Prudential Standard APS 001 Definitions (APS 001) 
appear in bold the first time they are used in this Prudential Standard. 
9. 
Where this Prudential Standard provides for APRA to exercise a power or 
discretion, this power or discretion is to be exercised in writing. 
 
 
January 2021 
 
APS 220 - 4 
10. 
In this Prudential Standard, unless the contrary intention appears, a reference to 
an Act, Regulations or Prudential Standard is a reference to the Act, Regulations 
or Prudential Standards as in force from time to time. 
11. 
In this Prudential Standard, a reference to a borrower is also a reference to a 
counterparty. 
Definitions 
12. 
The following definitions are used in this Prudential Standard in reference to an 
exposure: 
(a) 
non-performing – an exposure that is in default. A default is considered to 
have occurred with regard to a particular borrower when either, or both, of 
the events in sub-paragraphs (i) or (ii) have taken place: 
(i) 
the ADI considers that the borrower is unlikely to pay its credit 
obligations to the ADI in full, without recourse by the ADI to 
actions such as realising available security; 
Elements to be taken as indications of unlikeliness to pay include: 
(A) the ADI puts the credit obligation on non-accrued status (e.g. 
the lending ADI no longer recognises accrued interest as 
income or, if recognised, makes an equivalent amount of 
provisions); 
(B) the ADI makes a charge-off or account-specific provision 
resulting from a significant perceived decline in credit quality 
subsequent to the ADI taking on the exposure; 
(C) the ADI consents to a distressed restructuring of the credit 
obligation where this is likely to result in a diminished 
financial obligation caused by the material forgiveness, or 
postponement, of principal, interest or fees; 
(D) the ADI has applied for the borrower’s bankruptcy or a similar 
order in respect of the borrower’s credit obligation to the ADI; 
(E) 
the borrower has sought or has been placed in bankruptcy or 
afforded similar protection where this would avoid or delay 
repayment of any of the credit obligations to the ADI; 
(F) 
the ADI sells the credit obligation at a material credit-related 
economic loss; and 
(G) the exposure is a reverse mortgage with a loan-to-valuation 
ratio (LVR) greater than 100 per cent. 
(ii) 
the borrower is 90 days or more past-due on a credit obligation to 
the ADI or, in the case of subsidiaries in jurisdictions where a 
 
 
January 2021 
 
APS 220 - 5 
different number of days past-due is set for exposures to individuals 
(i.e. natural persons) or public sector entities by the national 
regulator, the borrower is past-due by the number of days (or more) 
specified by that national regulator. 
An exposure subject to a regular repayment schedule is considered 
90 days past-due when: 
(A) at least 90 calendar days have elapsed since the due date of a 
contractual payment which has not been met in full;1 and  
(B) the total amount unpaid outside contractual arrangements is 
equivalent to at least 90 days’ worth of contractual payments.2 
For exposures to individuals, the definition of default may be applied at 
the level of a particular credit obligation, rather than at the level of the 
borrower. As such, default by a borrower on one obligation, does not 
require an ADI to treat all other obligations to the ADI as being in default. 
(b) 
past-due – an exposure for which any amount due under a contract 
(interest, principal, fee or other amount) has not been paid in full at the 
date when it was due. An exposure is considered past-due from the first 
day of missed payment. 
An exposure will remain outside of contractual arrangements 
notwithstanding any waiver of payments unless such an exposure has been 
restructured. 
(c) 
restructured – an exposure for which: 
(i) 
a borrower is experiencing financial difficulty or hardship in 
meeting its financial commitments; and 
(ii) 
the ADI grants a concession to the borrower that it would not 
otherwise consider, whether or not the concession is at the discretion 
of the ADI or the borrower.3 
Examples of concessions include, but are not limited to: 
(A) extending a loan term; 
                                                 
1  
Overdrafts are considered past-due once the borrower has breached an advised limit or been 
advised of a limit smaller than current outstandings. Non-authorised overdrafts are considered to 
have a zero limit for regulatory capital purposes. An ADI must, therefore, treat days past-due as 
commencing once any credit is granted to an unauthorised borrower and if such credit is not repaid 
within 90 days, the exposure must be considered to be in default. 
2  
This includes all fees and any charges that are due but unpaid as a result of missed payments. 
3  
The main characteristic of these concessions are that an ADI would not extend loans or grant 
commitments to borrowers, or purchase their debt securities, on such terms and conditions under 
normal market conditions. 
 
 
January 2021 
 
APS 220 - 6 
(B) rescheduling the dates of principal or interest payments; 
(C) granting new or additional periods of non-payment (grace 
period); 
(D) reducing the interest rate, resulting in an effective interest rate 
below the current interest rate that borrowers with similar risk 
characteristics could obtain from the ADI or other institutions 
in the market; 
(E) 
capitalising arrears; 
(F) 
forgiving, deferring or postponing principal, interest or 
relevant fees; 
(G) changing an amortising loan to an interest payment only; 
(H) allowing the conversion of debt to equity of the borrower; 
(I) 
deferring recovery/collection actions for extended periods of 
time; 
(J) 
easing of covenants; and 
(K) refinancing an existing exposure with a new contract, even if 
the terms of the new contract are no more favourable for the 
borrower than those of the existing transaction. 
Adjustments and exclusions 
13. 
APRA may adjust or exclude a specific requirement in this Prudential Standard 
in relation to one or more specified ADIs or authorised NOHCs. 
Previous exercise of discretion 
14. 
An ADI must contact APRA if it seeks to place reliance, for the purposes of 
complying with this Prudential Standard, on a previous exemption or other 
exercise of discretion by APRA under a previous version of this Prudential 
Standard. 
Credit risk management framework 
15. 
An ADI must implement a credit risk management framework that is appropriate 
to its size, business mix and complexity. The credit risk management framework 
must, at a minimum, include: 
(a) 
a credit risk appetite statement; 
(b) 
a credit risk management strategy; 
 
 
January 2021 
 
APS 220 - 7 
(c) 
policies and processes supporting clearly defined and documented roles, 
responsibilities and formal reporting structures for the management of 
credit risk; 
(d) 
a designated credit risk management function; 
(e) 
a management information system that is adequate, both under normal 
circumstances and in periods of stress, for measuring, assessing and 
reporting on credit risk; and 
(f) 
an independent review process to ensure that the credit risk management 
framework is effective in identifying, measuring, evaluating, monitoring, 
reporting, and controlling or mitigating credit risk.4 
16. 
An ADI need not have a stand-alone credit risk appetite statement or credit risk 
management strategy document where they form part of the ADI’s overall risk 
appetite statement or risk management strategy document required under 
Prudential Standard CPS 220 Risk Management (CPS 220). 
Outsourcing 
17. 
An ADI may outsource aspects of its credit risk management, including credit 
origination, credit assessment and approval, however, it must have regard to 
Prudential Standard CPS 231 Outsourcing (CPS 231) for outsourced functions. 
Large exposures and associations with related entities 
18. 
For large exposures and associations with related entities, an ADI must also have 
regard to Prudential Standard APS 221 Large Exposures (APS 221) and 
Prudential Standard APS 222 Associations with Related Entities (APS 222), 
respectively. 
Credit risk appetite 
19. 
An ADI must maintain an appropriate and well-documented credit risk appetite 
statement. The statement must, at a minimum, articulate the degree of credit risk 
that the ADI is prepared to accept (credit risk appetite), the maximum level of 
credit risk that the ADI is willing to operate within (credit risk tolerance), the 
process for ensuring credit risk tolerances are set at an appropriate level, the 
process for monitoring compliance with credit risk tolerances and for taking 
appropriate action in the event it is breached, and the timing and process for 
review of the credit risk appetite and tolerances. 
Credit risk management strategy 
20. 
An ADI must maintain an appropriate and well-documented credit risk 
management strategy that outlines the objectives guiding the ADI’s credit 
                                                 
4  
Refer to paragraph 28(e) of this Prudential Standard. 
 
 
January 2021 
 
APS 220 - 8 
origination, credit assessment and approval activities and adopts the necessary 
policies and processes for conducting such activities. 
21. 
An ADI’s credit risk management strategy must reflect the ADI’s credit risk 
appetite, credit risk profile and market and macroeconomic conditions. 
22. 
An ADI’s credit risk management strategy must describe the ADI’s willingness 
to accept credit risk based on exposure type, economic or industry sector, 
geographical location, currency and maturity. This must also include the overall 
characteristics that the ADI would want to achieve in its credit portfolio. 
23. 
An ADI’s credit risk management strategy must consider the sustainability of 
earnings from its credit risk activities including an acceptable risk/reward trade-
off that would factor in cost of capital estimates. 
The role of the Board and senior management 
Board responsibilities 
24. 
The Board5 of an ADI must review and approve, on at least an annual basis, the 
ADI’s credit risk appetite and credit risk management strategy. 
25. 
The Board must regularly challenge, seek assurance and evidence from senior 
management that the credit risk policies, processes and practices are consistent 
with the credit risk management strategy (and, in turn, the credit risk appetite) of 
the ADI. The Board must obtain sufficient information to confirm whether or not 
the credit risk profile of the ADI is consistent with the credit risk management 
strategy, and require senior management to take appropriate and timely action if 
it is not. 
26. 
The Board must ensure that senior management of the ADI has the capability and 
resources to appropriately manage the credit risk activities conducted by the ADI 
and that such activities operate within the credit risk management strategy, credit 
risk policies and credit risk appetite. 
Senior management responsibilities 
27. 
Senior management of an ADI must have responsibility for implementing the 
Board approved credit risk management strategy and for developing and 
implementing appropriate policies and processes for identifying, measuring, 
monitoring, reporting and controlling or mitigating credit risk. Such policies and 
processes must address credit risk in all of the ADI’s activities and at both the 
individual exposure and portfolio levels. 
                                                 
5  
The requirements to be met by the Board must, in the case of a foreign ADI, be read subject to 
Prudential Standard CPS 510 Governance (CPS 510), which requires a foreign ADI to nominate 
a senior officer (whether a director or senior executive) outside Australia with delegated authority. 
 
 
January 2021 
 
APS 220 - 9 
28. 
Senior management’s responsibility for implementing the credit risk management 
strategy and for developing and implementing the credit risk policies of the ADI 
includes ensuring: 
(a) 
credit origination, credit assessment and approval activities conform to the 
established strategy and policies; 
(b) 
written processes are developed consistent with the credit risk 
management strategy and credit risk policies; 
(c) 
credit origination, credit assessment and approval and review 
responsibilities are clearly and properly assigned; 
(d) 
the strategy, policies and processes are effectively communicated 
throughout the ADI and that all relevant personnel clearly understand the 
ADI’s approach to originating, assessing, approving and managing credit 
risk and are held accountable for complying with the established policies 
and processes; and 
(e) 
there is a regular independent internal review of the ADI’s credit 
origination, credit assessment and approval and management functions. 
Such reviews must be conducted independently from the business 
function. This may involve an ADI’s independent risk management and 
compliance function or an independent internal audit function or qualified 
external party.  
Credit risk policies and processes 
29. 
An ADI must adopt and implement prudent and well-documented policies and 
processes to identify, measure, monitor, report and control or mitigate credit risk. 
The full credit life-cycle must be considered, including credit origination, initial 
and subsequent credit assessment and approval processes and the ongoing 
monitoring and management of the ADI’s credit exposures and portfolio. 
30. 
Credit risk policies must address such topics as target markets, portfolio mix, 
price and non-price terms, the structure of limits, approval authorities and 
overrides, waivers or exceptions processing and reporting. Such policies must be 
well-documented, clearly defined, consistent with prudent practices and 
applicable laws and regulations, and adequate for the size, nature and complexity 
of the ADI’s activities. 
31. 
Credit risk policies must be designed and implemented within the context of 
internal and external factors such as the ADI’s market position, personnel 
capabilities and technology. Appropriate operational capacity and business 
systems must be in place to support the credit risk management strategy before 
the strategy is implemented. 
32. 
An ADI must have prudent and well-documented policies and processes for the 
early identification and management of problem exposures, including non-
 
 
January 2021 
 
APS 220 - 10 
performing and restructured exposures and other transactions, and the 
maintenance of adequate provisions. 
33. 
An ADI must have appropriate credit risk practices, including an effective system 
of internal control, to consistently determine adequate provisions in accordance 
with the ADI’s stated policies and processes and Australian Accounting 
Standards. 
Internal risk appetite limits 
34. 
In addition to the requirements in CPS 220, APS 221 and APS 222, an ADI must 
develop and implement appropriate policies and processes to ensure that the 
credit portfolio is adequately diversified given the ADI’s target markets and credit 
risk management strategy. In particular, such policies must establish targets for 
portfolio mix as well as set prudent limits on exposures to: 
(a) 
higher risk borrowers; 
(b) 
higher risk credit products and activities; and 
(c) 
particular industry sectors and geographical locations, where appropriate. 
Country and transfer risk 
35. 
An ADI that originates credit exposures in geographical locations other than 
Australia must have prudent policies and processes for identifying, evaluating, 
measuring, monitoring, reporting and controlling or mitigating country risk and 
transfer risk.  Country or sovereign risk encompasses the entire spectrum of risks 
arising from the economic, political and social environments of a foreign country 
that may have potential consequences for foreigners’ debt and equity investments 
in that country. Transfer risk focuses more specifically on a borrower’s capacity 
to obtain the foreign exchange necessary to service its cross-border debt and other 
contractual obligations. The monitoring of country risk factors must incorporate: 
(a) 
the potential default of foreign borrowers arising from country-specific 
economic factors; and 
(b) 
the enforceability of agreements, including the timing and ability to realise 
collateral under the relevant legal framework. 
Credit origination 
36. 
An ADI must recognise and address the risks arising from different credit 
origination channels in its credit risk management framework. An ADI must 
exercise a higher level of diligence where credit assessment and approval 
decisions are made distant from the geographical location of a borrower or 
underlying collateral. 
 
 
January 2021 
 
APS 220 - 11 
37. 
Where there are material changes to origination channels, including their relative 
significance, an ADI must assess the impact of these changes on the ADI’s credit 
risk profile, and appropriately address the risks of such changes. 
38. 
In circumstances where third parties, such as brokers or introducers, are involved 
in credit origination, but have no ability to approve credit risk, an ADI must have 
a sound oversight process of the third party. In particular, an ADI must have 
prudent policies and processes to ensure that reasonable inquiries have been made 
and reasonable steps have been taken to verify the accuracy and completeness of 
all relevant borrower information provided by the third party and the outcomes 
of these processes must be documented. 
Credit assessment and approval process 
39. 
An ADI must establish sound credit assessment and approval criteria. These 
criteria must set out the borrowers that are eligible for credit, the extent and nature 
of credit the ADI is willing to provide and the terms and conditions the exposures 
would be subject to. 
40. 
An ADI must undertake a comprehensive assessment of a borrower’s credit risk 
which would consider and be proportionate to the nature, type and size of the 
exposure. An ADI must use experienced credit judgement in adopting a scalable 
and flexible approach to its credit risk assessment of a borrower. 
41. 
An ADI must assess credit risk primarily on the strength of a borrower’s 
repayment capacity. The ADI must not place undue reliance on collateral 
provided by the borrower as a substitute for a comprehensive credit assessment. 
42. 
An ADI must not place undue reliance on external credit ratings. An ADI must 
obtain adequate information to undertake a comprehensive credit assessment of a 
borrower. 
43. 
An ADI must give due consideration to the integrity and reputation of the 
borrower as well as its legal capacity to assume liability. 
Exposures to individuals 
44. 
For exposures to individuals, an ADI’s credit assessment must include 
consideration of the following criteria, where relevant: 
(a) 
the purpose and structure of the exposure and sources of repayment, 
including making reasonable inquiries and taking reasonable steps to 
verify income or cash flows; 
(b) 
the current risk profile of the borrower, including making reasonable 
inquiries and taking reasonable steps to verify commitments and total 
indebtedness; 
(c) 
the borrower’s repayment history and capacity, assessed under various 
scenarios such as: 
 
 
January 2021 
 
APS 220 - 12 
(i) 
an increase in interest rates; 
(ii) 
a change from a fixed-rate to a floating interest rate (and vice versa); 
(iii) a decrease in income or cash flows, particularly for less stable 
income or cash flow sources; and 
(iv) for exposures with an interest-only period that subsequently 
converts to principal and interest payments, on a principal and 
interest basis of repayment; 
(d) 
the borrower’s expenses, including the collection of reasonable estimates. 
Expense benchmarks must not be used as a substitute for an ADI making 
reasonable enquiries of a borrower’s expenses; 
(e) 
the proposed terms and conditions of the exposure, including covenants 
designed to limit the ADI’s exposure to changes in the future risk profile 
of the borrower to an acceptable level to the ADI; and 
(f) 
where applicable, the adequacy and enforceability of collateral, guarantees 
and other risk mitigants, including under various scenarios. 
Exposures other than to individuals 
45. 
For exposures other than to individuals, in addition to paragraphs 44(a), 44(b), 
44(c), 44(e) and 44(f), an ADI’s credit assessment must also include 
consideration of the following criteria, where relevant: 
(a) 
the borrower’s business expertise, economic or industry sector and its 
position within that sector; 
(b) 
the borrower’s historical financial and future cash flows; 
(c) 
the borrower’s equity capital invested in the business; and 
(d) 
the availability and enforceability of risk mitigants other than collateral, 
such as hedging and insurance. 
Collateral and guarantees 
46. 
An ADI must have prudent credit risk policies covering the acceptability of 
various forms of collateral, appropriate processes for the valuation of such 
collateral (including the valuation of collateral prior to entering into an exposure 
and the ongoing valuation of collateral, where appropriate), and an appropriate 
process to ensure that collateral is, and continues to be, enforceable and realisable 
(refer to Attachment A to this Prudential Standard). 
47. 
An ADI must ensure all valuations are appraised independently from the ADI’s 
credit origination, credit assessment and approval process. 
 
 
January 2021 
 
APS 220 - 13 
48. 
The valuation of collateral must reflect fair values, taking into account prevailing 
market conditions such as time taken for the liquidation or realisation of 
collateral. 
49. 
An ADI must also ensure that the valuation of collateral such as land takes into 
account, to the extent possible, the likelihood of external events, including but not 
limited to fire, drought and flood, which may impact the valuation of the asset 
taken as collateral. 
50. 
An ADI must have appropriate mechanisms in place for regularly assessing the 
value of collateral, guarantees and other risk mitigants. 
51. 
An ADI must establish appropriate limits on LVR to minimise the risk that a 
property serving as collateral will be insufficient to cover any repayment shortfall. 
An ADI must ensure there is appropriate scrutiny of any instances of lending with 
high LVR. 
52. 
An ADI must appropriately evaluate the level of coverage being provided in 
relation to the credit quality of the guarantor and legal enforceability of the 
guarantee. For exposures to individuals in particular, an ADI must ensure a 
guarantor has a clear understanding of the risks involved. 
Credit approval and experienced credit judgement 
53. 
An ADI must have a clearly established process in place for: 
(a) 
approving new exposures (including prudent credit standards); 
(b) 
renewing and refinancing existing exposures; and 
(c) 
identifying the appropriate approval authority for the size and complexity 
of the exposures. 
54. 
An ADI must document the credit assessment and approval process and identify 
the approval authority for each exposure, so that it is clear which personnel are 
accountable for the individual credit decision. 
55. 
An ADI must ensure personnel involved in the credit assessment and approval 
process have appropriate experience and knowledge to exercise prudent credit 
judgement commensurate with the nature, size and complexity of the transaction 
to which they are involved. 
56. 
An ADI must have prudent credit risk policies and processes with respect to 
overrides, waivers or exceptions, including clear identification of approval 
authorities and limits that reflect the maximum level of allowable overrides, 
waivers or exceptions.6 
                                                 
6  
An override occurs when an exposure is approved outside the ADI’s credit assessment criteria. 
This may also include where decisions suggested by models, such as a scorecard, are overridden. 
Overrides may occasionally be needed to deal with exceptional or complex credit applications. 
 
 
January 2021 
 
APS 220 - 14 
57. 
Exposures originated as overrides, waivers or exceptions to, or otherwise not in 
compliance with, credit risk policies must be regularly reported to an ADI’s 
relevant internal governance bodies and review functions. 
Third party credit assessment and approval 
58. 
Where an ADI uses a third party, such as a broker, to undertake any aspects of 
the credit assessment or approval, an ADI must implement appropriate oversight 
processes of the third party. An ADI must monitor and test the integrity of the 
third-party assessment and approval on a regular basis, either directly or through 
operationally independent personnel to ensure it aligns with the ADI’s credit 
assessment and approval criteria. 
59. 
Where an ADI has direct exposure to credit risk through a third party, such as an 
on-line lending platform and the platform operator or other third party undertakes 
the credit assessment and approval of the underlying borrowers under its own 
credit risk policies and processes, the ADI must perform adequate due diligence 
on these exposures, including obtaining: 
(a) 
a comprehensive understanding of the risk characteristics of the 
prospective and actual exposures; 
(b) 
timely access to and review of performance information on the exposures; 
and 
(c) 
a comprehensive understanding of all structural features of the transaction. 
Credit administration, measurement and monitoring 
60. 
An ADI must have an appropriate system for the ongoing administration of its 
credit portfolio. 
61. 
An ADI’s credit administration system must have regard to: 
(a) 
the efficiency and effectiveness of credit administration operations, 
including monitoring documentation, contractual requirements, covenants 
and collateral; 
(b) 
the accuracy and timeliness of information provided to management 
information systems; 
(c) 
adequate segregation of duties; 
(d) 
the adequacy of controls over all credit administration processes; and 
(e) 
compliance with credit risk policies and processes as well as applicable 
laws and regulations. 
62. 
An ADI must ensure its credit administration system captures all the information 
necessary to ascertain the current financial condition of the borrower as well as 
sufficient information to track all credit decisions made and the history of each 
 
 
January 2021 
 
APS 220 - 15 
exposure. An ADI’s credit risk review function must determine that credit 
administration is complete and that all approvals and other necessary documents 
have been obtained. 
63. 
An ADI must have an appropriate system for monitoring the condition of 
individual exposures, including determining the adequacy of provisions. 
64. 
An ADI must have in place an appropriate system for monitoring the overall 
composition and quality of the credit portfolio.  
65. 
An ADI must have an appropriate information system and analytical techniques 
that enable management to measure the credit risk inherent in all on- and off-
balance sheet activities. The management information system must provide 
adequate information on the composition of the ADI’s credit portfolio, including 
identification of any concentrations of risk. 
Credit risk grading systems 
66. 
Where appropriate for the scope, scale and complexity of its operations, an ADI 
must have in place an internal credit risk grading system. 
67. 
An ADI must have in place prudent policies and processes governing the 
development, validation, operation and oversight of its credit risk grading system. 
68. 
Coverage of the credit risk grading system must extend to as much of the ADI’s 
credit portfolio as possible, including off-balance sheet exposures. The credit risk 
grading system must meaningfully assess and differentiate risk and be able to 
rank risk consistently and through time. A sufficient number of risk grades must 
be included to ensure that the system adequately captures gradation of risk and 
the definitions and criteria for each risk grade must be plausible and intuitive. 
Stress testing 
69. 
An ADI must take into consideration potential future changes in economic 
conditions when assessing individual exposures and its credit portfolio, and must 
assess its credit risk exposures under stressed conditions. 
70. 
An ADI must undertake regular portfolio level and risk specific stress testing of 
its credit exposures.  
71. 
The complexity and granularity of an ADI’s stress testing must take into account 
the nature and scale of the ADI’s credit portfolio. An ADI must conduct stress 
testing at a sufficiently granular level to enable adequate sensitivity to the risk 
characteristics of different exposure types. Scenarios used for stress testing must 
include severe but plausible adverse conditions. 
72. 
An ADI must consider the results of stress testing in its overall limit setting and 
monitoring process. 
 
 
January 2021 
 
APS 220 - 16 
73. 
Stress testing analyses must include contingency plans regarding actions the 
Board and senior management may take given certain scenarios. 
74. 
An ADI’s stress testing arrangements must include well-documented and sound 
policies and processes governing the stress testing program, including the timely 
communication of information on scenarios, key assumptions, results and capital 
impacts to the ADI’s Board and senior management. 
75. 
Stress testing models must be appropriately validated and checked independently 
or by an appropriately qualified external party. 
Controls over credit risk 
Review of credit risk management processes 
76. 
An ADI must establish a system of independent, regular reviews of the ADI’s 
credit risk management processes and practices (refer to paragraph 28(e) of this 
Prudential Standard) and the results of such reviews must be communicated 
directly to the Board and senior management. 
Internal controls and limits 
77. 
An ADI must ensure that the credit origination, credit assessment and approval 
function is properly managed and that credit exposures are within levels 
consistent with an ADI’s limits. An ADI must establish and enforce internal 
controls and other practices to ensure that overrides, waivers or exceptions to 
policies, processes and limits are reported in a timely manner to the appropriate 
level of management for action. 
Systems for remedial action 
78. 
An ADI must have an appropriate system in place for early remedial action on 
problem exposures, managing problem exposures and similar workout situations. 
An ADI’s collections systems must bring together a borrower’s arrears profile 
and be able to be scaled to manage high volumes in a time of stress. 
79. 
An ADI must have an effective workout program for problem exposures, with the 
segregation of the workout function from the area that originated the exposure. 
An ADI must have an effective strategy and appropriate organisational resources 
and personnel in place to manage these exposures. 
80. 
An ADI must have prudent policies and processes that assist the ADI to recover 
as much of an exposure as is reasonably achievable within the requirements 
established by law and also having regard to community expectation as to how 
borrowers are to be treated. An ADI must consider the risk to its reputation in 
such circumstances. 
 
 
January 2021 
 
APS 220 - 17 
Classification of exposures and provisions 
81. 
An ADI must have prudent policies and processes for classifying its credit risk 
exposures for prudential reporting purposes and for establishing appropriate and 
robust provisioning levels. An ADI’s system for classification and provisioning 
must take into account on- and off-balance sheet exposures.  
82. 
An ADI must classify its credit risk exposures as performing or non-performing. 
An ADI must have adequate documentation to support its classification of 
exposures and its provisioning levels. An ADI must also classify its exposures 
when payments are past-due for a minimum number of days (i.e. 30, 60 and 90 
days). 
83. 
An ADI must regularly review its exposures at an individual level or at a portfolio 
level to ensure appropriate classification of exposures, provisioning levels and 
write-offs. 
84. 
An ADI must have sound policies and processes to ensure that provisions and 
write-offs are timely and reflect realistic repayment and recovery expectations, 
taking into account market and macroeconomic conditions. 
85. 
An ADI’s Board must obtain timely and appropriate information on the condition 
of the ADI’s credit portfolio, including the classification of exposures as 
performing and non-performing and the level of provisions. The information must 
include, at a minimum, results of the latest credit risk review process, comparative 
trends in the overall quality of exposures and measurements of existing or 
anticipated deterioration in asset quality and expected credit losses. 
86. 
An ADI must ensure that valuation, classification and provisioning for material 
non-performing exposures are conducted on an individual exposure basis. 
87. 
An ADI must regularly assess any trends and concentrations in risk and risk build-
up in relation to credit exposures and take into account any observed 
concentration in the risk mitigation strategies adopted and the potential effect on 
the efficacy of the mitigant in reducing loss. An ADI must consider the adequacy 
of provisions in light of this assessment. 
Non-performing exposures 
88. 
For the purposes of this Prudential Standard, non-performing exposures must be 
measured as the whole amount of the exposure including where non-performance 
relates to only a part of the exposure, for example, unpaid interest. For off-balance 
sheet exposures, the whole exposure is the entire notional amount. 
89. 
Collateral and other risk mitigation arrangements must not directly influence the 
categorisation of an exposure as non-performing. 
90. 
Collateral may be considered, along with other factors, in assessing whether a 
borrower is likely to pay. Collateralisation must not influence the past-due status, 
including the counting of past-due days and the determination of the exposure as 
 
 
January 2021 
 
APS 220 - 18 
non-performing. An exposure must be classified as non-performing where it 
meets the definition of non-performing even if the collateral value exceeds the 
amount of the past-due exposure. 
Off-balance sheet exposures 
91. 
An ADI must classify off-balance sheet exposures as non-performing where the 
ADI has cause to believe that it is unlikely to recoup, in a timely manner, the full 
amounts it may be required to advance. 
92. 
Commitments must also be classified as non-performing if the creditworthiness 
of a borrower has deteriorated to an extent that the timely repayment in full by 
the borrower of any potential drawdown or associated interest payments or fees 
is unlikely. 
93. 
If an ADI considers it unlikely that it will receive timely repayment, in full, of 
cash flow entitlements which are or will be due from a counterparty to a derivative 
transaction, it must classify such an exposure as non-performing. In this regard, 
an ADI must calculate its derivative transaction exposures to counterparties for 
the purposes of measuring non-performance under the standardised approach or 
the adjusted current exposure method prescribed in Prudential Standard APS 180 
Capital Adequacy: Counterparty Credit Risk (APS 180). Potential exposure add-
ons applied in calculating such exposures must reflect the nature of the individual 
facility involved. Derivative transaction exposures must be revalued regularly so 
as to maintain reasonably current assessments of the extent of credit risk attaching 
to these transactions. 
Reclassification of non-performing exposures to performing 
94. 
An ADI may reclassify an exposure from non-performing to performing when all 
of the following criteria are met: 
(a) 
the borrower does not have any exposure 90 days or more past-due; 
(b) 
repayments have been made when due over a continuous repayment 
period of at least 90 days, except for restructured exposures for which 
repayments, as per the revised contractual terms, must have been made in 
a timely manner over a continuous repayment period of not less than six 
months (the probation period); 
(c) 
the borrower’s situation has improved so that the full repayment of the 
exposure is likely, according to the original or, when applicable, modified 
conditions; and 
(d) 
the exposure does not meet the definition of non-performing in paragraph 
12(a). 
95. 
An ADI must not reclassify a non-performing exposure as performing in the 
following circumstances: 
 
 
January 2021 
 
APS 220 - 19 
(a) 
partial write-off of an existing non-performing exposure (i.e. when an 
ADI writes-off part of a non-performing exposure that it deems to be 
uncollectible); 
(b) 
repossession of collateral on a non-performing exposure, until the 
collateral is actually disposed of and the ADI realises the proceeds; or 
(c) 
extension or granting of restructure measures to an exposure that is 
already identified as non-performing subject to the relevant exit criteria 
for non-performing exposures (refer to paragraphs 94(a) to 94(d)).  
96. 
The reclassification of a non-performing exposure as performing must be made 
on the same level (such as a borrower or transaction approach) as when the 
exposure was originally categorised as non-performing. 
Restructured exposures 
97. 
Any restructuring of an exposure must be supported by a current, well-
documented credit evaluation of the borrower’s financial condition and prospects 
for repayment under the modified terms. Renegotiation of an exposure must not 
be used to obscure the poor quality of a loan’s or other financial instrument’s 
performance, or avoid an increase in provisions. Before any concession is made 
to a borrower, the appropriate level of the ADI’s management must approve the 
restructure. 
98. 
Restructure may be granted on performing or non-performing exposures. When 
restructure is applied to a non-performing exposure, the exposure must continue 
to be classified as non-performing. When restructure is applied to a performing 
exposure, the ADI must assess whether the exposure meets the definition of non-
performing, even if the restructure resulted in a new exposure. If the assessment 
is that the original exposure would have been treated as non-performing at the 
time of restructure, had the restructure not been granted, the new exposure must 
be treated as non-performing. 
99. 
An ADI must monitor the appropriate categorisation of exposures on which 
restructure has been granted more than once. When a restructured exposure under 
the probation period is granted new forbearance, this must trigger a restart of the 
probation period. 
100. The continuous repayment period for non-performing exposures and the 
probation period for restructured exposures may run concurrently. Non-
performing exposures that are restructured must continue to be classified as non-
performing until they meet the criteria in paragraph 94. When a restructured 
exposure becomes non-performing during the probation period, the probation 
period must start again. 
 
 
January 2021 
 
APS 220 - 20 
101. An exposure that is not subject to the National Credit Code7 need not be reported 
as restructured where it is placed on restructured terms for less than twelve 
months due to financial difficulty being experienced by the borrower but where 
long-term viability is unquestioned (e.g. an agricultural exposure encountering a 
bad season). The ADI must, however, be reasonably confident that the borrower 
is able to fully perform with no loss of principal and the originally contracted 
amount of interest or other payments due, and the ADI must not maintain any 
provisions assessed against the exposure on an individual basis. 
Criteria for exit from the restructured exposures category 
102. An ADI must classify a restructured exposure as such until it meets both of the 
following exit criteria: 
(a) 
when all payments, as per the revised contractual terms, have been made 
in a timely manner over a continuous repayment period of not less than 
six months (probation period). The starting date of the probation period 
must be the scheduled start of payments under the revised terms; and 
(b) 
the borrower has resolved its financial difficulty. 
Credit risk and accounting for expected credit losses 
103. An ADI must adopt, document and adhere to sound methodologies that address 
policies, processes and controls for assessing and measuring credit losses on all 
exposures. The measurement of provisions must build on robust methodologies 
and result in the appropriate and timely recognition of expected credit losses in 
accordance with Australian Accounting Standards. 
104. An ADI’s aggregate amount of provisions must be adequate and consistent with 
the objectives of Australian Accounting Standards. 
105. An ADI must have sound policies and processes in place to appropriately validate 
models used to assess and measure expected credit losses. 
106. An ADI must use experienced credit judgement, particularly in the robust 
consideration of reasonable and supportable forward-looking information, 
including macroeconomic factors, in its assessment and measurement of expected 
credit losses. 
107. An ADI must have an appropriate credit risk assessment and measurement 
process that provides it with a sound basis for common systems, tools and data to 
assess credit risk and to account for expected credit losses. 
Prescribed provisioning 
108. Where APRA considers that a simple overall approach to determining provisions 
is acceptable for regulatory purposes, or APRA judges an ADI’s own practices 
                                                 
7  
The National Credit Code as per Schedule 1 to the National Consumer Credit Protection Act 2009 
(Cth). 
 
 
January 2021 
 
APS 220 - 21 
for identifying provisions to be inadequate in view of its credit risk profile, APRA 
may permit, or require, an ADI to implement the prescribed provisioning 
approach described in Attachment B to this Prudential Standard. 
109. Prescribed provisions are minimum provisions that an ADI must hold. Where an 
ADI establishes provisions under Australian Accounting Standards in excess of 
those prescribed, the ADI must continue for regulatory capital and APRA 
reporting purposes, to include any excess provisions as part of its specific 
provisions or general provisions as appropriate. 
Supervisory limits 
110. Where APRA considers that an ADI is taking excessive credit risk relative to its 
financial or operational capacity to manage or absorb that risk, APRA may set 
limits on particular exposures or categories of exposures that may be held by that 
ADI, including but not limited to limits on growth or limits on the share of the 
ADI's portfolio, or may require the ADI to cease a particular type of lending or 
credit activity. 
111. If APRA considers that there is an excessive level or growth in higher risk lending 
or credit activity more broadly, APRA may set limits on particular types of 
lending, including but not limited to, the share of lending or growth rate of 
lending, to be complied with by all ADIs or a specified class of ADIs. In 
considering whether there is an excessive level or growth in higher risk lending 
or credit activity, APRA will have regard to, among other factors, any easing of 
credit standards and practices and the proportion of an ADI’s higher risk lending, 
including whether this lending is high leverage, high LVR or interest-only. 
Adequacy of credit risk management and provisions 
112. Where APRA considers an ADI’s policies, processes and practices across its 
credit risk activities do not meet the requirements of this Prudential Standard or 
otherwise considers its credit risk management deficient, APRA may require the 
ADI to amend credit risk management policies, processes, and practices, or adopt 
appropriate credit risk management policies, processes and practices, or increase 
the levels of provisions or write-offs reported, or otherwise increase its capital 
adequacy.8  
Special purpose engagements 
113. APRA may require an ADI to appoint an independent party to review and provide 
a report to APRA on all or a particular aspect of the ADI’s credit risk 
management, including provisioning practices. APRA may, however, request 
such a report without prior consultation with an ADI. APRA may set the terms of 
the review and at the ADI’s expense. 
                                                 
8  
This also includes an ADI’s policies, processes and practices for collateral measured at fair value 
that do not meet the requirements of this Prudential Standard, including circumstances where an 
ADI’s collateral valuations are considered deficient. 
 
 
January 2021 
 
APS 220 – Attachment A - 22 
Attachment A – Collateral valuation 
1. 
Collateral can include guarantees, insurance arrangements and, importantly, 
security held over various forms of assets. This Attachment applies to all forms 
of collateral, including all types of assets taken as security. An ADI must apply 
this Attachment, having regard to the nature and type of security held. 
2. 
An ADI must ensure that assets to be taken as security are accurately identified 
and documented in exposure documentation. An ADI must ensure that the 
relevant legal requirements are met to maintain the ADI’s security position and 
to provide for its enforcement. This includes the ADI confirming that: 
(a) 
the borrower has, or will have when the exposure is extended, clear title to 
the assets; 
(b) 
the characteristics of the collateral are as they have been represented; and 
(c) 
assets serving as collateral, where relevant, are appropriately insured at 
the time of origination and this insurance is maintained under the 
contractual terms of the exposure. 
3. 
Valuation of security must be undertaken on any exposure prior to drawdown 
and, where appropriate, an on-going basis. 
4. 
In the event that the fair value of security is based on observable market values, 
an ADI’s policies and processes must have regard to: 
(a) 
when observable market prices would be used; 
(b) 
the basis for selecting the market prices to be used; 
(c) 
the impact of market liquidity on the pricing of assets and the timing of 
their disposal; and 
(d) 
costs which would arise in accessing and disposing of assets held as 
collateral. 
5. 
In determining the fair value of security, an ADI may utilise the valuations of 
suitably qualified internal appraisers, external valuers or automated valuation 
methods. Policies and processes covering the fair value of security must address 
the circumstances in which such valuations would be sought. 
6. 
Where an ADI uses valuations from internal appraisers, it must have policies and 
processes which address: 
(a) 
when valuations would be provided by internal appraisers to remove the 
potential for real or perceived conflicts of interests which may affect the 
valuations; and 
 
 
January 2021 
 
APS 220 – Attachment A - 23 
(b) 
the qualifications and experience required of internal appraisers when 
undertaking valuations. 
7. 
If an ADI relies on external expertise for its security valuation needs, it must 
establish robust selection and review mechanisms. Factors that must be 
considered in the selection process include: 
(a) 
professional qualifications required; 
(b) 
relevant experience, including local knowledge; 
(c) 
breadth of expertise to cover both standard and specialised security 
assessments; and 
(d) 
appropriate professional insurance cover. 
8. 
If an ADI relies on the use of alternative valuation methods such as desktop 
assessments, kerbside assessments and automated valuation methods to produce 
a security valuation, it must have appropriate policies and processes which 
address: 
(a) 
when valuations would be provided by the alternative method;  
(b) 
monitoring, validation and reporting of valuation data; and 
(c) 
asset values including adequate haircuts for conservatism when using 
automated valuation methods. 
9. 
An ADI contemplating the use of alternative valuation methods must subject 
proposals to thorough analysis and develop a risk management capability that 
includes: 
(a) 
a hierarchy of acceptable methods of determining value that is appropriate 
to the level of risk; 
(b) 
analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of the relevant approaches or 
models being considered, including an understanding of the 
methodologies used, sources of data employed and how a service provider 
may be able to assist in reengineering the ADI’s processes; 
(c) 
details of any back testing of a statistically random sample of alternative 
methods or auditing arrangements undertaken by a service provider; 
(d) 
clarity of the output to be provided and how it would be integrated with 
the ADI’s processes; and 
(e) 
ongoing monitoring of tools used, processes that capture evidence of 
action taken when values are deemed to be unreliable and periodic back 
testing undertaken by the ADI to independently validate reliability of 
outcomes. 
 
 
January 2021 
 
APS 220 – Attachment A - 24 
10. 
Policies and processes must also provide for the formulation of instructions for 
the conduct of valuations. Each valuation request must be the subject of specific 
instructions to the appraiser or valuer. These instructions must cover (as relevant 
in each instance) appropriate issues such as valuation purpose, valuation basis 
required, valuation for insurance purposes, valuation method, market 
summary/commentary and form of report required. Where a party other than the 
ADI instructs the valuer, the valuation must be appropriately endorsed for the 
ADI’s use. In these circumstances, the valuation must be confirmed by an internal 
appraiser, or an external valuer, with the appropriate expertise. 
11. 
Where an ADI relies on a panel of approved valuation professionals, an ADI’s 
credit risk management must provide for the panel to be regularly reviewed at 
least annually by the ADI.  
12. 
If an ADI uses valuations in determining the fair value of security, the ADI must 
require valuers and appraisers, in preparing their valuation reports, to adopt the 
valuation standards and practices of any relevant professional bodies. For 
example, in the case of property valuations, the standards and practices of the 
Australian Property Institute or equivalent local or offshore bodies must be used. 
Valuation reports must be based on the standard format advocated by any relevant 
professional bodies. 
13. 
An ADI must have policies and processes directed at ensuring the reliability of 
the valuation processes and valuations received in respect of security held. This 
must involve independent and regular internal reviews of valuations and 
automated valuation methods results by appropriate management or audit 
personnel and formal reviews by an independent valuer. 
14. 
An ADI’s policies and processes must provide for regular assessment of security 
values so as to ensure that the fair value of security underpinning provisioning 
and reserves, and any security coverage measures applied to exposures, is timely 
and reliably reflects values which an ADI might realise if needed. This is 
especially important where exposures are secured by assets that are susceptible to 
significant changes in value, or where the margin for diminution of value of 
security is small. 
Valuation of security in the form of property 
15. 
For the purposes of determining the fair value of security involving property, an 
ADI must assume: 
(a) 
a property would be accessed in the near future; 
(b) 
the period for marketing a property would be up to 12 months, although a 
longer period (up to a maximum of 24 months) may be adopted for 
specialised or unusual properties when professional valuers advise that 
this is appropriate; and 
(c) 
market conditions and asset values remain static over the marketing 
period. Marketing periods must be retrospective and assumed to have 
 
 
January 2021 
 
APS 220 – Attachment A - 25 
elapsed at the date of valuation, rather than incorporating any improved 
market conditions. 
16. 
Property assets must be based on fair values. In determining fair values, an ADI 
must use conservative estimates in imputing future income streams, such as lease 
payments which are not already contracted. An ADI must ensure key assumptions 
used in the valuation approach are appropriate and there is sufficient evidence to 
support the assumptions. An ADI must review and be satisfied of the 
reasonableness of key assumptions before the valuation takes place. 
17. 
In determining fair values, any valuation based on highest and best use rather than 
existing use must be adequately supported and documented.9 Where applicable, 
the valuation report must set out how highest and best use was determined.  
18. 
In some circumstances, it may be difficult to determine the fair value of property 
assets that have not yet achieved a stable income, or properties that are 
experiencing fluctuations in income. In such cases, a forecast of expected cash 
flows must be used to estimate the value of the property. The discount rates used 
in calculating the value of security must reflect the opportunity cost, determined 
by way of comparison with prevailing returns on competing investments, of 
holding the property, assuming a long-term holding. Capitalisation rates must 
reflect expectations about the long-term rate of return investors require under 
normal, orderly and sustainable market conditions. 
Valuation of security in the form of non–real estate assets 
19. 
Where collateral is in the form of a security interest over assets as defined in the 
Personal Property Securities Act 2009, an ADI must ensure that all relevant 
security is properly scrutinised.   
20. 
Where a third party supplies information relating to a security interest held by an 
ADI, for example, outstanding debtors, asset values must be objectively assessed 
to ensure security coverage is adequate. This may include testing of information 
supplied. 
21. 
In determining the fair value of security not in the form of real property, an ADI 
must also have regard to considerations such as market liquidity, legal costs, 
impediments to realisation and prior charges.  
                                                 
9  
For example, highest and best use arising from redevelopment prospects, and any possible 
increase in value consequent upon special investment or finance transactions. 
 
 
January 2021 
 
APS 220 – Attachment B - 26 
Attachment B – Prescribed provisioning 
1. 
Where an ADI undertakes prescribed provisioning, the level of prescribed 
provisions must be reported to APRA notwithstanding the level of any provisions 
which an ADI may have actually raised, or the form in which such provisions 
have been reported, in its audited published financial reports. Where an ADI 
establishes such provisions in excess of those prescribed, the ADI must continue, 
for capital and APRA reporting purposes to include any excess provisions, as part 
of its specific provisions or general provisions as appropriate. 
2. 
The amount of prescribed provisions that an ADI is required to hold will, unless 
otherwise agreed with APRA, be in addition to any general provisions which it 
may hold. 
3. 
A prescribed provision must be treated as a specific provision for capital and 
APRA reporting purposes and reported on an after-tax basis. Any deferred tax 
asset associated with the prescribed provision must be removed. Prescribed 
provisions must be deducted from an ADI’s Common Equity Tier 1 Capital 
unless the amount of the prescribed provision has otherwise not been included in 
Common Equity Tier 1 Capital. 
4. 
Where the Board or senior management of an ADI believe that the prescribed 
provisions calculated in accordance with this Prudential Standard do not 
reasonably address assessed loss outcomes, they must report additional specific 
provisions. The level of specific provisions required will depend on the type of 
exposure and term of payments past-due or the period of irregularity in cash flows 
due on an exposure. 
5. 
Alternatively, where an ADI can satisfy APRA that the level of provisioning 
prescribed under this Attachment is higher than it might prudently require, the 
ADI may seek APRA’s written agreement to report a lower level of such 
provisions as specific provisions. The difference between the level of provisions 
prescribed under this Attachment and that which it is agreed an ADI might 
prudently report may instead be included as part of the ADI’s general provisions 
or, alternatively, may be returned to Common Equity Tier 1 Capital as agreed 
with APRA. An ADI will need to fully satisfy APRA that its estimates of its 
provisioning needs are both prudent and comprehensive.  
6. 
An ADI subject to prescribed provisioning arrangements must determine its 
specific provisions for capital and APRA reporting purposes in accordance with 
the four categories of past-due exposures defined in this Attachment. The 
prescribed provisions calculated represent a minimum level of provisioning that 
an ADI must report, subject to paragraph 5 of this Attachment. 
7. 
Where an exposure maintained by an ADI utilising prescribed provisioning does 
not fall into the four categories of exposures outlined in this Attachment and the 
exposure is a non-performing exposure, the amount of provision to be held against 
this item must reflect the risk involved and must be agreed with APRA. 
 
 
January 2021 
 
APS 220 – Attachment B - 27 
Categories of past–due exposures 
Category One exposures 
8. 
No prescribed provisions are mandated for Category One exposures. 
9. 
Category One exposures are well-secured (refer to paragraphs 18 and 19 of this 
Attachment) and include: 
(a) 
an exposure that is secured by a registered first mortgage against a 
residential property and is insured by an eligible lenders mortgage insurer 
(as defined in APS 112) for 100 per cent of the outstanding balance; 
(b) 
an exposure that is secured by a registered first mortgage against a 
residential property, where the ratio of the outstanding balance, less the 
amount of mortgage insurance, to the valuation of the security is no more 
than 80 per cent (where the exposure is 90 days or more worth of 
payments past-due, and the valuation is not older than 12 months); and 
(c) 
an exposure that is secured by a registered second mortgage against a 
residential property where: 
(i) 
the ratio of the outstanding balances of the exposure secured by both 
first and second mortgages to the valuation of the residential property 
does not exceed 80 per cent, and the first mortgage cannot be 
extended without it being subordinated to the second mortgage; or 
(ii) 
where the ratio of the outstanding balances of the exposure secured 
by both first and second mortgages to the valuation of the residential 
property exceeds 80 per cent, and the first mortgage cannot be 
extended without it being subordinated to the second mortgage, and 
the outstanding balance is 100 per cent mortgage insured by an 
eligible lenders mortgage insurer (as defined in APS 112). 
Category Two exposures 
10. 
A Category Two exposure is defined as an exposure that is secured by a registered 
first mortgage against a residential property, where the ratio of the outstanding 
balance, less the amount of lenders’ mortgage insurance, to the valuation of the 
security is greater than 80 per cent but no more than 100 per cent (where the loan 
is 90 days or more worth of payments past–due, and the valuation is not older 
than 12 months). 
11. 
For Category Two exposures, the prescribed provision is a percentage of the 
balance outstanding, where the percentage depends upon the term of payments 
past-due. An ADI must apply the minimum provisions for Category Two 
exposures in Table 1. 
 
 
January 2021 
 
APS 220 – Attachment B - 28 
Table 1: Category Two exposures  
Term of payments past–due 
Amount of Provision (%) 
Up to 90 days 
0 
90 days and less than 182 days 
5 
182 days and less than 273 days 
10 
273 days and less than 365 days 
15 
365 days and over 
20 
 
12. 
Where the provision calculated under Category Two exposures is greater than the 
provision that would have been calculated under Category Three exposures, the 
latter must be taken as the prescribed provision. 
Category Three exposures 
13. 
Category Three exposures apply to all exposures that do not fall into Categories’ 
One, Two, or Four. Personal and commercial loans (both secured and unsecured), 
and residential mortgage loans where the ratio of the outstanding balance, less the 
amount of lenders mortgage insurance, to the valuation of the security is greater 
than 100 per cent, are included. 
14. 
The minimum provision for these items is a percentage of the balance 
outstanding, where the percentage depends upon the term of payments past-due. 
An ADI must apply the minimum provisions for Category Three exposures in 
Table 2. 
Table 2: Category Three exposures  
Term of payments past–due 
Amount of Provision (%) 
Up to 90 days 
0 
90 days and less than 182 days 
40 
182 days and less than 273 days 
60 
273 days and less than 365 days 
80 
365 days and over 
100 
 
15. 
Where an exposure is secured by a mortgage over a residential property, the 
provision may be adjusted to reflect a part of the fair value of security held. When 
this occurs, the minimum provision percentage in the table above must be applied 
to the difference between the outstanding balance less any lenders’ mortgage 
insurance and 70 per cent of the security value, where the exposure is 90 days or 
more worth of payments past-due, and the valuation is not older than 12 months. 
Where an exposure is secured by collateral other than residential property, an ADI 
 
 
January 2021 
 
APS 220 – Attachment B - 29 
may approach APRA to discuss an appropriate basis upon which to value security 
held. 
16. 
Where an exposure is otherwise secured by equivalent or better security 
arrangements than that described in paragraph 15 of this Attachment, an ADI 
may, on application to APRA, seek to have the provision adjusted to reflect the 
whole or part of the fair value of security held. APRA may agree to an adjustment 
if it is satisfied that the provision, as adjusted, more appropriately covers the risk 
on the exposures. APRA will apply the following guidelines in considering the 
application: 
(a) 
guarantees provided by Commonwealth or State Governments, or ADIs, 
may be deducted from the full value of the exposure prior to applying the 
prescribed provisioning requirements; 
(b) 
Crown leases involving property used for residential purposes may be 
adjusted in accordance with this Attachment; 
(c) 
bank bills and government securities held as collateral, if subject to 
enforceable security in favour of the ADI, may be deducted from the value 
of the exposure at their fair value prior to applying the prescribed 
provisioning requirements; and 
(d) 
cash on deposit with the ADI may only be deducted from the full value of 
the exposure prior to applying the prescribed provisioning requirements for 
the purposes of prescribed provisioning where the deposits are secured by 
appropriate contractual arrangements that satisfy the eligible collateral 
provisions contained in APS 112. A right of offset is not considered to 
provide appropriate security per se. 
Category Four exposures 
17. 
This category applies to overdrawn savings accounts and overdrawn limits on 
revolving exposures such as credit cards, overdrafts and line of credit advances. 
The minimum provision on these items is a percentage of the balance outstanding, 
where the percentage depends on the period of irregularity, as shown below. In 
calculating the minimum provision for each item, except for overdrawn savings 
accounts, the full amount of the credit drawn must be included in the balance 
outstanding. For overdrawn savings accounts, the provision is only applied to the 
overdrawn amount. Refer to Table 3. 
Table 3: Category Four exposures  
Period of Irregularity 
Amount of Provision (%) 
Up to 14 days 
0 
14 days and less than 90 days 
40 
90 days and less than 182 days 
75 
182 days and over 
100 
 
 
January 2021 
 
APS 220 – Attachment B - 30 
 
Well-secured exposures 
18. 
A well-secured exposure is, for the purposes of this Attachment, defined as one 
where an ADI judges that:  
(a) 
the value of collateral, including the fair value of associated security is 
sufficient to ensure that the ADI will recover the outstanding principal, 
including any previously due but unpaid interest or fees, and other 
previously unpaid amounts, and any estimated shortfall in all remaining 
cash flows due over the life of the exposure. This includes any amounts 
arising over the period until collateral is obtained and settled. Collateral 
includes any arrangement that protects the ADI from losing, partially or 
fully, the principal, interest or other amounts due on an exposure. This 
will include secured interests in assets, lenders mortgage insurance, cash 
collateral, guarantees, put options and interest servicing arrangements. An 
ADI must be able to demonstrate to APRA, if required, that any value 
ascribed to collateral is reliable in a recovery situation; and  
(b) 
there is reasonable assurance that collection efforts will result in payment 
of amounts due in a timely manner, including full compensation for 
overdue payments.  
19. 
In determining whether the coverage provided by collateral will enable an ADI 
to recoup all cash flows due over the life of the exposure, including any 
outstanding payments due but not yet received, the ADI must take account of any 
costs, for example, selling costs, involved in taking possession of and realising 
the value of collateral. 
Restructured exposures, assets acquired through security enforcement and 
other real estate owned 
20. 
Prescribed provisioning does not apply to restructured exposures, assets acquired 
through security enforcement and other real estate owned which meet the 
requirements for items to qualify as performing. 
 
 


--- End of file: APS 220 Credit Risk Management.txt ---

 
 
 
 
Banking (prudential standard) 
determination No. 7 of 2020 
Prudential Standard APS 222 Associations with Related 
Entities 
Banking Act 1959 
 
I, John Lonsdale, delegate of APRA: 
 
(a) 
under subsection 11AF(3) of the Banking Act 1959 (the Act) REVOKE 
Banking (prudential standard) determination No. 9 of 2014, including 
Prudential Standard APS 222 Associations with Related Entities, made under 
that Determination; and 
(b) 
under subsection 11AF(1) of the Act DETERMINE Prudential Standard 
APS 222 Associations with Related Entities, in the form set out in the 
Schedule, which applies to all ADIs to the extent provided in paragraphs 2 to 3 
of the prudential standard. 
 
This instrument commences on 1 January 2022. 
 
Dated: 8 December 2020 
 
 
 
[Signed] 
 
 
John Lonsdale 
Deputy Chair 
 
 
Interpretation 
In this Determination: 
ADI has the meaning given in section 5 of the Act. 
APRA means the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority. 
Authorised Version F2020L01591 registered 11/12/2020
 
 
 
Schedule  
 
Prudential Standard APS 222 Associations with Related Entities comprises the 
document commencing on the following page. 
Authorised Version F2020L01591 registered 11/12/2020
 
January 2022 
 
APS 222 - 1 
 
 
 
Prudential Standard APS 222   
Associations with Related Entities  
Objectives and key requirements of this Prudential 
Standard 
The objective of this Prudential Standard is that authorised deposit-taking institutions 
identify, monitor and control contagion risks arising from their associations and 
dealings with related entities and those creating step-in risk.  
The key requirements of this Prudential Standard are that an authorised deposit-taking 
institution must: 
 
have a Board-approved policy that governs its associations and dealings with its 
related entities; 
 
identify, monitor, manage and control potential contagion risk between the 
authorised deposit-taking institution and its related entities and step-in risk 
entities; 
 
meet minimum requirements with respect to dealings with related entities and 
step-in risk entities which may give rise to prudential concerns; and 
 
maintain exposures to related entities within limits. 
 
Authorised Version F2020L01591 registered 11/12/2020
 
January 2022 
 
APS 222 - 2 
Table of Contents 
Authority ........................................................................................................... 3 
Application ....................................................................................................... 3 
Interpretation .................................................................................................... 3 
Definitions ........................................................................................................ 3 
Adjustments and exclusions............................................................................. 5 
Previous exercise of discretion ........................................................................ 5 
The role of the Board ....................................................................................... 5 
Control of risks arising from related entities ..................................................... 5 
Provision of support ......................................................................................... 7 
Group badging and disclosures ....................................................................... 8 
Participation in group operations ...................................................................... 8 
Limits on exposures to related entities ............................................................. 9 
Measuring exposures to related entities ........................................................ 10 
Prior notification requirements ....................................................................... 10 
Notification requirements ............................................................................... 11 
Approval requirements ................................................................................... 11 
Attachment A — Step-in risk .......................................................................... 13 
Attachment B — Funds management ............................................................ 14 
Attachment C — Extended Licensed Entity ................................................... 17 
 
Authorised Version F2020L01591 registered 11/12/2020
 
January 2022 
 
APS 222 – 3 
Authority 
 
This Prudential Standard is made under section 11AF of the Banking Act 1959 
1.
(the Banking Act). 
Application 
 
This Prudential Standard applies to all authorised deposit-taking institutions 
2.
(ADIs), on a Level 1 basis, except purchased payment facility providers 
(PPF providers), subject to paragraph 3 of this Prudential Standard. 
 
A foreign ADI is only required to comply with the requirements in paragraphs 
3.
23 to 28 of this Prudential Standard. 
 
This Prudential Standard commences on 1 January 2022. 
4.
Interpretation 
 
Terms that are defined in Prudential Standard APS 001 Definitions (APS 001) 
5.
appear in bold the first time they are used in this Prudential Standard. 
 
Where this Prudential Standard provides for APRA to exercise a power or 
6.
discretion, this power or discretion is to be exercised in writing. 
 
In this Prudential Standard, unless the contrary intention appears, a reference to 
7.
an Act, Regulations or Prudential Standard is a reference to the Act, Regulations 
or Prudential Standard as in force from time to time. 
Definitions 
 
The following definitions are used in this Prudential Standard: 
8.
(a) 
control over an entity includes, but is not limited to, having: 
(i) 
more than 50 per cent of voting rights over the entity; 
(ii) 
a voting agreement with other shareholders resulting in control of 
voting rights over the entity; 
(iii) significant influence over the appointment of persons to or removal 
of persons from the entity’s management, Board of directors 
(Board1) or board committees; 
(iv) significant influence over a senior manager or senior management 
of the entity (including influence on the policies of the entity); 
(b) 
ELE subsidiary means a subsidiary that has been approved to be part of 
an ADI’s extended licensed entity (ELE); 
                                                 
1  
A reference to the Board in the case of a foreign ADI, is a reference to the senior officer outside 
Australia. 
Authorised Version F2020L01591 registered 11/12/2020
 
January 2022 
 
APS 222 – 4 
(c) 
entity has the meaning given in section 9 of the Corporations Act 2001 
(Corporations Act) for the purposes of Chapter 2E of that Act, a 
government-related entity or a trust; 
(d) 
funds management means the provision of investment and related services 
for the management of investors’ funds;2 
(e) 
government-related entity means a public sector entity, a state-owned 
enterprise or an entity controlled (whether directly or indirectly) by any 
level of government or a central bank; 
(f) 
related entity of an ADI means an entity which could give rise to risk to 
the ADI due to conflicts of interest and contagion, where the risk would 
not arise if the ADI were dealing with an unrelated entity. A related entity 
of an ADI includes, but is not limited to, any of the following: 
(i) 
an entity which is directly or indirectly controlled by the ADI;  
(ii) 
an entity which directly or indirectly controls the ADI; 
(iii) a substantial shareholder of the ADI; and 
(iv) a related individual of the ADI and the related individual’s relatives. 
Where APRA considers it appropriate, APRA may require an ADI to treat 
an entity as a related entity;  
(g) 
related individual of an ADI means a senior manager of the ADI, an 
individual who is a Board member of the ADI or any other individual that 
is likely to have direct or indirect control over the ADI, the ADI’s senior 
management or the ADI’s Board;  
(h) 
step-in risk entity means an entity to which an ADI is likely to provide 
support beyond any legal or contractual obligation to do so; and 
(i) 
substantial shareholder means a person or entity which has a substantial 
holding in the ADI, where ‘substantial holding’ has the meaning given in 
section 9 of the Corporations Act but is read as if it referred to 10 per cent 
or more of the total number of votes attached to voting shares instead of 5 
per cent or more. 
 
A dealing with a related entity includes, but is not limited to, on- and off-
9.
balance sheet credit transactions, support arrangements, asset purchases and 
sales, service contracts, leasing agreements, derivatives transactions, acquisition 
of real property, provisions, restructuring and write-offs. 
                                                 
2  
A funds management vehicle holds assets and issues securities to (or receives funds from) 
investors in order to facilitate funds management activities. 
Authorised Version F2020L01591 registered 11/12/2020
 
January 2022 
 
APS 222 – 5 
Adjustments and exclusions 
 
APRA may adjust or exclude a specific prudential requirement in this Prudential 
10.
Standard in relation to one or more specified ADIs.3 
Previous exercise of discretion 
 
An ADI must contact APRA if it seeks to place reliance, for the purposes of 
11.
complying with this Prudential Standard, on a previous exemption or other 
exercise of discretion by APRA under a previous version of this Prudential 
Standard. 
The role of the Board 
 
The Board of an ADI is ultimately responsible for oversight of the ADI’s 
12.
associations with its related entities and for approving policies governing the 
ADI’s dealings and associations with its related entities. The Board must ensure 
these policies are reviewed at least annually and that they remain adequate and 
appropriate for the ADI’s risk appetite, risk profile, capital, balance sheet size 
and the complexity of the ADI’s group. 
Control of risks arising from related entities 
 
An ADI’s policies on dealings and associations with related entities must 
13.
consider contagion risks to the ADI that arise from its group structure and 
related entities, and form part of the ADI’s risk management strategy and risk 
management framework required under Prudential Standard CPS 220 Risk 
Management. An ADI must assess contagion risks to the ADI on a regular basis, 
at least annually, taking into consideration: 
(a) 
the number and size of entities within its group and the complexity of the 
group structure; 
(b) 
the adequacy of systems, controls and risk management across the group; 
(c) 
the level of financial and operational interdependence across the group;  
(d) 
whether other members of the group are regulated entities (i.e. regulated 
by APRA or by an equivalent prudential regulator overseas); 
(e) 
whether the location of the ADI’s subsidiaries undermines the ability of 
its subsidiaries to be resolved in a sound and timely manner; and 
(f) 
badging and product distribution arrangements that might link the ADI’s 
reputation to other entities. 
 
An ADI’s policies on dealings and associations with related entities must be 
14.
based on an assessment of material risks to the ADI and, at a minimum, include: 
                                                 
3  
Refer to subsection 11AF(2) of the Banking Act. 
Authorised Version F2020L01591 registered 11/12/2020
 
January 2022 
 
APS 222 – 6 
(a) 
a requirement that the ADI deal with related entities on an arm’s-length 
basis and on market terms and conditions;  
(b) 
limits on exposures to related entities at both an individual and aggregate 
level, which are determined having regard to: 
(i) 
the level that would be approved for unrelated entities of an 
equivalent credit status; and 
(ii) 
the impact on the ADI’s stand-alone capital and liquidity positions 
in the event of a failure of a related entity; 
(c) 
the circumstances in which the limits relating to exposures and write-offs 
may be exceeded and the authority and processes required for approving 
such excesses; 
(d) 
the authority and processes required for the approval and maintenance of 
group structures, where the ADI is the head of a group, and establishing 
and acquiring subsidiaries; 
(e) 
procedures to address risks arising from participation in group operations 
(refer to paragraphs 27 and 28 of this Prudential Standard); 
(f) 
procedures for resolving conflicts of interest arising from dealings with 
related entities; 
(g) 
processes to ensure the transparency of third-party dealings that are 
connected with related entities; and 
(h) 
procedures to address material risks to the ADI arising from the ADI 
distributing financial products of another counterparty and vice-versa. 
 
An ADI’s Board must first approve the terms and conditions agreed to by an 
15.
ADI in relation to dealings with its related entities that are not consistent with 
terms and conditions that would be negotiated with an unrelated entity with 
justifications fully and clearly documented in a register.  
 
An ADI must not: 
16.
(a) 
have unlimited exposures to related entities either in aggregate or at an 
individual entity level; or 
(b) 
agree to cross-default provisions whereby a default by a related entity on 
an obligation, whether financial or otherwise, triggers or is deemed to 
trigger a default by the ADI on its obligations. 
 
An ADI must implement adequate systems and controls to identify, measure, 
17.
monitor, manage and report exposures arising from dealings with related entities 
and step-in risk entities. Where APRA is not satisfied with the adequacy of the 
ADI’s systems and controls or is of the view that the ADI is exposed to 
substantial contagion risk, APRA may: 
Authorised Version F2020L01591 registered 11/12/2020
 
January 2022 
 
APS 222 – 7 
(a) 
determine higher capital adequacy requirements including Prudential 
Capital Requirements (PCRs) for the ADI; 
(b) 
require the ADI to establish additional internal controls or a more robust 
reporting mechanism; or 
(c) 
require the ADI to take measures to reduce the level of contagion risk to 
its related entities or step-in risk entities. 
 
An ADI must meet the requirements in relation to the identification, 
18.
measurement and management of step-in risk as set out in Attachment A to this 
Prudential Standard. 
Provision of support 
 
An ADI must not undertake any dealings with unrelated entities for the purpose 
19.
of supporting the business of related entities. 
 
An ADI must not provide support to related entities, and an ADI must not 
20.
accept support from its related entities, unless such support is expressed clearly 
in legal documentation, is fixed as to time and amount, and is in accordance 
with the ADI’s policies and the prudential requirements set out in paragraphs 13 
to 17 of this Prudential Standard.4 
 
An ADI must satisfy APRA, upon request, that when it purchases assets from or 
21.
securities or other forms of liabilities issued by a related entity, or sells assets 
and securities to a related entity, that these activities do not constitute the ADI 
providing capital support to the related entity. APRA may require an ADI to 
deduct from Common Equity Tier 1 Capital the value of assets, securities or 
other liabilities where APRA is not satisfied that the activities do not constitute 
the provision of capital support.  
 
An ADI must meet the requirements in Attachment B to this Prudential 
22.
Standard in relation to the provision of liquidity facilities to funds management 
vehicles. 
 
A foreign ADI must not provide support to its subsidiaries operating in 
23.
Australia, and a foreign ADI must not accept support from its subsidiaries 
operating in Australia, unless such support is expressed clearly in legal 
documentation and is fixed as to time and amount. A foreign ADI that wishes to 
give a general guarantee over the obligations of its Australian subsidiaries must 
be able to demonstrate to APRA that its home supervisor is aware of the 
obligations and has no objection to the transaction. 
                                                 
4  
For the avoidance of doubt, paragraph 20 also applies to provision of support by a foreign-
owned ADI to non-ADI entities operating in Australia directly owned by the ADI’s foreign 
parent or by the parent’s subsidiaries (and vice versa). 
Authorised Version F2020L01591 registered 11/12/2020
 
January 2022 
 
APS 222 – 8 
Group badging and disclosures  
 
An ADI must not use a brand name in common with members of its 
24.
conglomerate group except where the ADI and group members clearly and 
prominently disclose their roles and responsibilities in order to reduce the risk of 
giving the impression that a non-ADI member of the group is an ADI, or that a 
group member is guaranteed or supported by an ADI in the group.  
 
Unless otherwise prohibited by the laws of a foreign jurisdiction, when there are 
25.
financial transactions between an external counterparty and a member of the 
ADI’s group that uses a common brand name with the ADI, the ADI must 
ensure that disclosure to the external counterparty includes that: 
(a) 
the group member with whom the counterparty is dealing is not an ADI 
(where this is the case) and that the member’s obligations do not represent 
deposits or other liabilities of the ADI in the group; 
(b) 
the ADI does not stand behind the group member, unless support is 
provided for in legal documentation (refer to paragraphs 20 and 23 of this 
Prudential Standard). Where support is provided for, the nature and 
limitations of the ADI’s obligations arising from its involvement must be 
disclosed; and 
(c) 
the investor is exposed to investment risk including possible delays in 
repayment and loss of income and principal invested, as relevant. 
 
APRA may require an ADI to not use a brand name in common with a group 
26.
member if that would give rise to a prudential concern having regard to the 
following factors: 
(a) 
the presence of appropriate disclosures; 
(b) 
the type of entity involved (whether the group member is regulated or 
unregulated); 
(c) 
the group member’s risk profile, reputation and associations; 
(d) 
the manner in which various products and services are marketed;  
(e) 
the types of customers involved with the group member; and 
(f) 
other factors on a case-by-case basis. 
Participation in group operations 
 
An ADI must establish policies and procedures to address risks posed to the 
27.
ADI from participating in group operations including, but not limited to, sharing 
premises with other group members, centralising back-office functions or 
outsourcing services to other group members. 
 
Where an ADI participates in group operations, the ADI must: 
28.
Authorised Version F2020L01591 registered 11/12/2020
 
January 2022 
 
APS 222 – 9 
(a) 
ensure that those operations do not adversely affect the safety and 
soundness of the ADI as a stand-alone entity; 
(b) 
be satisfied that any exposures generated are addressed by the ADI’s 
policies and procedures on participating in group operations; 
(c) 
ensure dealings with other parties arising from participation in group 
operations are appropriately documented in written service agreements;5 
(d) 
ensure there is a clear documented obligation for a service provider to 
comply with a direction given by APRA in relation to the operations of 
the ADI; and 
(e) 
ensure such operations are not likely to lead to confusion for customers 
about the respective roles and responsibilities of the ADI and the group 
member. 
Limits on exposures to related entities 
 
The exposures of an ADI to its related entities must not exceed the following 
29.
limits:6 
(a) 
related ADIs or overseas based equivalents: 
(i) 
exposure to an individual related ADI or overseas based equivalent 
– 25 per cent of an ADI’s Tier 1 Capital on a Level 1 basis; and 
(ii) 
aggregate exposure to all related ADIs and overseas based 
equivalents – 75 per cent of  an ADI’s Tier 1 Capital on a Level 1 
basis; and 
(b) 
other related entities: 
(i) 
exposure to an individual regulated related entity (other than a 
related ADI or related overseas-based equivalent) – 25 per cent of 
an ADI’s Tier 1 Capital on a Level 1 basis; 
(ii) 
exposure to an individual unregulated related entity – 15 per cent of 
an ADI’s Tier 1 Capital on a Level 1 basis; and 
(iii) aggregate exposure to all related entities (other than related ADIs 
and related overseas-based equivalents) – 35 per cent of an ADI’s 
Tier 1 Capital on a Level 1 basis. 
                                                 
5  
Outsourcing of the ADI’s material business activities to a related entity must satisfy the 
prudential requirements set out in Prudential Standard CPS 231 Outsourcing. 
6  
These limits are measured against an ADI’s or ELE’s Level 1 capital calculated in accordance 
with Prudential Standard APS 111 Capital Adequacy: Measurement of Capital as appropriate. 
None of these limits should be taken to permit transactions or exposures which are otherwise 
prohibited by any Prudential Standard. The large exposure limits in paragraph 30 of Prudential 
Standard APS 221 Large Exposures do not apply to the exposures of an ADI to its related 
entities when this paragraph applies. 
Authorised Version F2020L01591 registered 11/12/2020
 
January 2022 
 
APS 222 – 10 
 
An ADI’s exposure to an ELE subsidiary is not subject to the limits in 
30.
paragraph 29 of this Prudential Standard or requirements in Prudential Standard 
APS 111 Capital Adequacy: Measurement of Capital (APS 111) relating to the 
treatment of investments in and capital support provided to an ADI’s 
subsidiaries.7  
 
An ADI must meet the requirements in relation to its ELE subsidiaries as set out 
31.
in Attachment C to this Prudential Standard. 
 
An ADI’s exposures to the foreign parent of the ADI, the foreign parent’s 
32.
overseas based subsidiaries and their directly owned non-ADI entities operating 
in Australia are required to be within the limits in Prudential Standard APS 221 
Large Exposures (APS 221). 
 
Notwithstanding paragraph 29 of this Prudential Standard, APRA may set 
33.
specific limits in relation to an ADI’s exposure to one or more related entities 
having regard to the ADI’s individual circumstances. 
Measuring exposures to related entities 
 
An ADI’s exposure to a related entity is the aggregate of all claims, 
34.
commitments and contingent liabilities arising from on- and off-balance sheet 
transactions in both the banking and trading books with the related entity, and 
must be measured in accordance with Attachment A to APS 221. 
 
An ADI’s exposure to a regulated related entity must be measured in accordance 
35.
with paragraph 34 of this Prudential Standard and must include any equity 
exposures and capital support provided to the regulated related entity (including 
any off-balance sheet exposure arising from guarantee of capital instruments 
issued by the related entity) that has not been deducted from the ADI’s Level 1 
capital for capital adequacy purposes. 
 
Where an ADI is required to apply the look-through requirement in Attachment 
36.
A to APS 221 for an exposure to a structured vehicle that is a related entity and 
the ADI has an exposure to an underlying asset that is another related entity of 
the ADI, the ADI must recognise all of these exposures under the limits in 
paragraph 29 of this Prudential Standard. 
 
An ADI’s exposure to a related entity excludes the exposures specified in 
37.
paragraph 18 of APS 221. 
Prior notification requirements 
 
An ADI must notify APRA prior to: 
38.
(a) 
establishing or acquiring a subsidiary other than an entity which is to be 
used purely as a special purpose vehicle to provide finance to the ADI; 
                                                 
7  
Refer to paragraph 8 of Attachment D to APS 111 on equity holdings and other capital support 
provided to financial institutions.  
Authorised Version F2020L01591 registered 11/12/2020
 
January 2022 
 
APS 222 – 11 
(b) 
committing to any proposal to acquire (whether directly or indirectly) 
greater than, or equal to, 20 per cent of the equity interest in an entity; or 
(c) 
committing to any proposed exposure to a related entity that is greater 
than, or equal to, 10 per cent of the ADI’s Tier 1 Capital. 
 
APRA may require an ADI to not proceed with a transaction that has been 
39.
subject to the prior notification requirements in paragraph 38 of this Prudential 
Standard, or impose prudential conditions on the transaction or higher capital 
adequacy requirements on the exposure, if APRA is not satisfied with the ADI’s 
risk assessment. Factors that APRA will consider include, but are not limited to: 
(a) 
the ADI’s assessment of the factors in paragraph 13 of this Prudential 
Standard; 
(b) 
the adequacy of the ADI’s systems, controls and resources to identify, 
measure, monitor, manage and report exposures and risks arising from the 
activity; and 
(c) 
whether the transaction exposes the ADI to substantial contagion risks or 
hinders effective supervision. 
 
APRA may determine that an ADI is not required to notify APRA prior to 
40.
committing to proposed transactions that are below a specified threshold, having 
regard to the robustness of the ADI’s risk management framework. 
Notification requirements 
 
An ADI must notify APRA immediately of any breach of the limits in 
41.
paragraph 29 of this Prudential Standard or other specific limits imposed by 
APRA under paragraph 33 of this Prudential Standard, including how the breach 
arose and remedial actions taken or planned to deal with the breach.8 
 
An ADI must notify APRA regarding any equity investments that are not 
42.
subject to the prior notification requirements set out in paragraph 38 of this 
Prudential Standard, within three months of undertaking the investment. 
 
An ADI must notify APRA immediately after it becomes aware of any 
43.
circumstances that might reasonably be seen as having a material impact or 
potentially adverse consequences for an ADI in the group or for the overall 
group. This includes, but is not limited to, material changes in the structure of a 
group which is headed by the ADI and a significant breach of, or material 
changes in, the ADI’s policies on dealings with related entities. 
Approval requirements 
 
An ADI must obtain approval from APRA prior to undertaking any proposed 
44.
exposures in excess of the limits set out in paragraph 29 of this Prudential 
                                                 
8  
This does not apply to an exposure for which APRA has provided an approval under paragraph 
44 of this Prudential Standard. 
Authorised Version F2020L01591 registered 11/12/2020
 
January 2022 
 
APS 222 – 12 
Standard or any specific limit imposed by APRA under paragraph 33 of this 
Prudential Standard. APRA will only grant such approval on an exceptions 
basis taking into consideration the individual circumstances of the ADI and the 
ADI’s assessment of: 
(a) 
the contagion risks involved with exceeding the limits (including the 
factors in paragraph 13 of this Prudential Standard) and why the proposed 
exposures will not unreasonably expose the ADI to excessive risk; and 
(b) 
how the proposed exposures are consistent with its policies on related 
entities. 
 
An ADI must obtain approval from APRA prior to the establishment or 
45.
acquisition of a regulated entity, branch or presence domestically or overseas. 
 
Authorised Version F2020L01591 registered 11/12/2020
 
January 2022 
 
APS 222 Attachment A – 13 
Attachment A — Step-in risk 
 
An ADI must maintain a risk appetite statement and strategy for managing its 
1.
associations and dealings with step-in risk entities.  
 
An ADI must have adequate systems and controls in place to identify, measure, 
2.
monitor, manage and report exposures arising from dealings with step-in risk 
entities. 
 
An ADI must identify an entity which exposes the ADI to step-in risk. In 
3.
identifying step-in risk entities, the factors that an ADI must consider include, 
but are not limited to: 
(a) 
the nature and extent of the ADI’s sponsorship of the entity, including 
whether the ADI manages or advises the entity, places its securities into 
the market, or provides the entity with liquidity facilities or credit 
enhancements; 
(b) 
whether investors expect the ADI to support the entity during a stress 
scenario; 
(c) 
whether business arrangements with the entity (e.g. distributing or 
marketing of the other entity’s products) expose the ADI to reputational 
contagion; 
(d) 
whether the entity has a limited capacity to access liquidity when facing 
an unanticipated increase in redemption requests; 
(e) 
whether the ADI is a major provider of assets, or is perceived to be a 
major provider of assets, or other financial services to the entity;  
(f) 
whether the entity carries the ADI’s brand; and 
(g) 
whether there have been past instances of the entity receiving support 
from the ADI beyond the ADI’s legal or contractual obligation.  
 
Where an ADI has identified a step-in risk entity, the ADI must determine the 
4.
materiality of the step-in risk through an assessment of the potential impact on 
the capital and liquidity of the ADI if it were to step-in to support the entity.  
 
 
 
 
Authorised Version F2020L01591 registered 11/12/2020
 
January 2022 
 
APS 222 Attachment A – 14 
Attachment B — Funds management 
 
The requirements in this Attachment apply to an ADI’s associations with a 
1.
funds management vehicle that is a related entity of the ADI. Where an ADI has 
an exposure to a funds management vehicle that is an unrelated entity, the ADI 
must meet the requirements in APS 221 with respect to exposure limits and 
look-through requirements for structured vehicles. 
Separation 
 
An ADI must not act as a manager, responsible entity, approved trustee, trustee 
2.
or any similar role in relation to funds management. 
 
An ADI must deal with a funds management vehicle and its investors on an 
3.
arm’s- length basis and on market terms and conditions. 
 
An ADI must not: 
4.
(a) 
have any ownership or beneficial interest in a funds management vehicle;9 
or 
(b) 
allow any of the ADI’s directors, officers or employees to sit on the Board 
of a funds management vehicle unless the Board is made up of at least 
four members. The ADI may be represented by one director on a Board of 
four to six directors and by no more than two directors on a Board of 
seven or more directors. 
 
The requirements in paragraph 4 do not apply to an ADI’s ownership or 
5.
beneficial interest in, or seats on the Board of: 
(a) 
a custodian; 
(b) 
a life insurance company and its statutory funds regulated by APRA or an 
equivalent regulator overseas; 
(c) 
an RSE licensee or custodian established under provisions of the 
Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993 or equivalent legislation 
overseas; 
(d) 
a licensed trustee company of a common fund, within the meaning of 
Chapter 5D of the Corporations Act; or 
(e) 
a responsible entity of a managed investment scheme, within the meaning 
of section 9 of the Corporations Act, or similar entities registered under 
like statutory provisions overseas. 
                                                 
9  
For the avoidance of doubt, this does not apply to purchases of a fund management vehicle’s 
securities, which must comply with paragraph 6 of this Attachment.  
Authorised Version F2020L01591 registered 11/12/2020
 
January 2022 
 
APS 222 Attachment A – 15 
Purchase of securities 
 
An ADI must not purchase more than 20 per cent of the outstanding value of a 
6.
funds management vehicle’s securities unless the purchase arises as part of an 
underwriting agreement. 
Liquidity facilities 
 
An ADI must deduct the value of a liquidity facility provided to a funds 
7.
management vehicle, from the ADI’s Common Equity Tier 1 Capital, if any of 
the following conditions are met: 
(a) 
the facility is able to be drawn upon to fund additional assets held by the 
vehicle, to acquire assets of the vehicle, to fund the final scheduled 
repayment of investors or to cover against dilution of seller’s risk (e.g. the 
cancellation of assets or breach of warranties); 
(b) 
the repayments of the facility to the ADI are subordinated to the interests 
of investors; or 
(c) 
the facility is provided without another facility being provided by an 
unrelated entity to the funds management vehicle, unless the ADI provides 
a liquidity facility that covers less than 10 per cent of outstanding 
securities and is used for the purpose of: 
(i) 
providing short-term funding for smoothing time differences in 
payment flows (excluding the retirement of securities at maturity or 
on roll-overs); 
(ii) 
meeting margin payments on futures transactions; or 
(iii) covering delays in settling asset transactions involving the vehicle. 
Underwriting of funds management vehicles 
 
An ADI that acts as an underwriter or committed dealer for the issue of 
8.
securities by a funds management vehicle must deduct the value of the facility 
from the ADI’s Common Equity Tier 1 Capital if: 
(a) 
the funds management vehicle does not have an express right to select an 
alternative party to provide the facility;  
(b) 
the ADI does not have the ability to withhold payment, and to terminate 
the facility if necessary, upon the occurrence of events which would 
materially and negatively impact the soundness of the ADI; and 
(c) 
the ADI underwrites a significant proportion of the issue of securities and 
either of the following conditions exist: 
(i) 
the ADI cannot demonstrate its ability in placing securities of the 
type underwritten; or 
Authorised Version F2020L01591 registered 11/12/2020
 
January 2022 
 
APS 222 Attachment A – 16 
(ii) 
the amount of the ADI’s aggregate commitment under all 
underwriting facilities as sole dealer is more than 20 per cent of the 
ADI’s Tier 1 Capital. 
 
An ADI that underwrites the issue of securities by a funds management vehicle 
9.
must not hold more than 20 per cent of the outstanding value of a funds 
management vehicle’s securities after two months of the underwriting 
agreement’s commencement. Additionally, from two months after the 
underwriting agreement’s commencement, any exposure over this amount must 
be deducted from Common Equity Tier 1 Capital. 
 
Authorised Version F2020L01591 registered 11/12/2020
 
January 2022 
 
APS 222 Attachment C – 17 
Attachment C — Extended Licensed Entity 
 
An ADI must obtain approval from APRA to treat one or more of its 
1.
subsidiaries as consolidated with the ADI itself, to form an ELE for prudential 
and reporting purposes.10  
 
An ELE subsidiary that no longer meets the criteria in paragraph 3 of this 
2.
Attachment will cease to form part of the ELE and must be treated as a non-
ELE related entity of the ADI. An ADI must inform APRA as soon as it 
becomes aware that an ELE subsidiary is likely to or no longer satisfies the 
criteria set out in this Attachment. 
 
In order for a subsidiary to be eligible to be consolidated with the ADI itself to 
3.
form an ELE: 
(a) 
the subsidiary must: 
(i) 
be incorporated in Australia unless the subsidiary has been 
established to borrow on behalf of the ADI and continues to restrict 
its activities to solely borrowing on behalf of the ADI;  
(ii) 
be wholly owned by the ADI, and the Board of the subsidiary must 
be composed entirely of members of the ADI’s Board or senior 
management; 
(iii) not be an entity regulated directly by APRA or by an equivalent 
regulator overseas; 
(iv) not undertake any business that the ADI is prevented from 
conducting under the Banking Act; 
(v) 
not be structured, or undertake business, for the purpose of 
circumventing APRA’s prudential or reporting requirements; and 
(vi) not undertake borrowings from, or establish liabilities (either on- or 
off-balance sheet) to, entities other than the ADI, except where the 
subsidiary has been established to borrow on behalf of the ADI, and 
all funds are on-lent directly to the ADI. Taxation liabilities, 
employee entitlements, administration and operating expenses of the 
subsidiary are excluded from this requirement; and 
(b) 
the ADI must: 
(i) 
have complete information on the individual assets, liabilities and 
off-balance sheet positions of the subsidiary. The ADI must have 
access to the stand-alone accounting records of the subsidiary, and 
                                                 
10  
For the avoidance of doubt, a reference to an ADI in this Attachment means an ADI as defined 
in section 5 of the Banking Act, rather than an ELE. 
Authorised Version F2020L01591 registered 11/12/2020
 
January 2022 
 
APS 222 Attachment C – 18 
must be able to provide APRA with full and unfettered access to 
those records and any other information, at any time; 
(ii) 
have unrestricted control over the composition of the subsidiary’s 
assets and liabilities. The ADI must demonstrate to APRA that there 
are no legal or regulatory barriers, or any other material risks, to the 
transfer of any assets or funds including assets or funds of 
underlying subsidiaries back to the ADI. There must be no legal 
obstacle to the ADI instituting a wind-up of the subsidiary, or any 
underlying subsidiaries, at any time and placing the remaining assets 
on the balance sheet of the ADI; 
(iii) manage the assets, liabilities and off-balance sheet business of the 
subsidiary as part of its internal management practices. This 
includes 
reporting 
structures, 
accounting 
processes, 
audit 
arrangements and risk management and measurement systems. The 
ADI’s risk management processes, management information 
systems and internal controls must be applied to the operations of 
the subsidiary. Senior management of the ADI must monitor the 
operations of the subsidiary to the same extent as the operations of 
the ADI itself. Systems for monitoring and control over the 
subsidiary must be included within the internal and external audit 
programs of the ADI; and 
(iv) satisfy APRA that the number and size of subsidiaries on an 
individual and aggregate basis proposed to be included, or currently 
included, in the ELE does not undermine the ability: 
(A) of the ADI and the subsidiaries to be managed and resolved in 
a sound and timely manner; and 
(B) for APRA to assess the soundness of the ADI as a stand-alone 
legal entity. 
 
Where an ADI seeks to include a non-operating holding company (NOHC) as 
4.
part of its ELE, the ADI may also include the NOHC’s subsidiaries as part of 
the ELE provided these subsidiaries meet the requirements in this Attachment. 
However, only the first level of subsidiaries below a NOHC are eligible to be 
treated as part of the ELE. 
 
In assessing whether a subsidiary should form part of an ELE, APRA will have 
5.
regard to the requirements in this Attachment, as well as the substance and form 
of the subsidiary and its relationship with the ADI. APRA may, at its discretion, 
require an ADI to provide additional information, including the provision of an 
accounting or legal opinion, on any of the requirements in this Attachment or 
deem that a subsidiary is no longer eligible to form part of an ELE. 
Authorised Version F2020L01591 registered 11/12/2020


--- End of file: APS 222 Associations with Related Entities.txt ---

 
 
 
 
 
Financial Sector (Collection of Data) 
(reporting standard) determination No. 8 of 
2018  
Reporting Standard ARS 118.0 Off-balance Sheet Business 
Financial Sector (Collection of Data) Act 2001 
 
I, Alison Bliss, delegate of APRA, under paragraph 13(1)(a) of the Financial Sector 
(Collection of Data) Act 2001 (the Act) and subsection 33(3) of the Acts 
Interpretation Act 1901: 
 
(a) 
REVOKE Financial Sector (Collection of Data) (reporting standard) 
determination No. 3 of 2008, including Reporting Standard ARS 118.0 Off-
balance Sheet Business made under that Determination; and 
 
(b) 
DETERMINE Reporting Standard ARS 118.0 Off-balance Sheet Business, in 
the form set out in the Schedule, which applies to the financial sector entities to 
the extent provided in paragraph 3 of the reporting standard.  
 
Under section 15 of the Act, I DECLARE that the reporting standard shall begin to 
apply to those financial sector entities, and the revoked reporting standard shall cease 
to apply, on 1 April 2018.  
 
This instrument commences on 1 April 2018. 
 
Dated: 21 March 2018 
 
[Signed] 
 
 
Alison Bliss 
General Manager 
Data Analytics Division 
 
 
 
Authorised Version F2018L00363 registered 23/03/2018
 
 
 
 
Interpretation 
In this Determination: 
APRA means the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority. 
financial sector entity has the meaning given by section 5 of the Act.  
 
 
Schedule  
 
Reporting Standard ARS 118.0 Off-balance Sheet Business comprises the document 
commencing on the following page. 
Authorised Version F2018L00363 registered 23/03/2018
 
 
April 2018 
 
 
ARS 118.0 - 1 
 
Reporting Standard ARS 118.0 
Off-balance Sheet Business 
Objective of this Reporting Standard 
This Reporting Standard is made under section 13 of the Financial Sector (Collection 
of Data) Act 2001.  
This Reporting Standard outlines the overall requirements for the provision of 
information to APRA relating to an authorised deposit-taking institution’s off-balance 
sheet exposures. It should be read in conjunction with:  
 
the versions of Reporting Form ARF 118.0 Off-balance Sheet Business 
designated for an authorised deposit-taking institution reporting at Level 1 and 
Level 2, and the associated instructions (all of which are attached and form part 
of this Reporting Standard); and 
 
Prudential Standard APS 112 Capital Adequacy: Standardised Approach to 
Credit Risk or Prudential Standard APS 113 Capital Adequacy: Internal 
Ratings-based Approach to Credit Risk, as appropriate. 
 
Authority 
1. 
This Reporting Standard is made under section 13 of the Financial Sector 
(Collection of Data) Act 2001. 
Purpose 
2. 
Data collected in Reporting Form ARF 118.0 Off-balance sheet business (ARF 
118.0) is used by APRA for the purpose of prudential supervision, including 
assessing compliance with Prudential Standard APS 112 Capital Adequacy: 
Standardised Approach to Credit Risk or Prudential Standard APS 113 Capital 
Adequacy: Internal Ratings-based Approach to Credit Risk, as appropriate.  It 
may also be used by the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) and the Australian 
Bureau of Statistics (ABS). 
Authorised Version F2018L00363 registered 23/03/2018
 
 
April 2018 
 
 
ARS 118.0 - 2 
Application and commencement 
3. 
This Reporting Standard applies to an authorised deposit-taking institution 
(ADI) that is included in one of the classes of ADI to which this Reporting 
Standard applies, as set out in the table below. 
Class of ADI 
Applicable 
Bank – Advanced or Applicant Advanced 
Yes 
Bank – Standardised  
Yes 
Branch of a Foreign Bank 
Yes  
Building Society 
Yes 
Credit Union 
Yes 
Provider of Purchased Payment Facilities 
No 
Other ADI 
Yes 
 
This Reporting Standard may also apply to the non-operating holding company 
(NOHC) of an ADI (refer to paragraph 6). 
 
4. 
This Reporting Standard commences on 1 April 2018. 
Information required 
 
5. 
An ADI to which this Reporting Standard applies that is a bank – advanced or 
applicant advanced, bank – standardised, building society, credit union, or other 
ADI must provide APRA with the information required by the version of ARF 
118.0 designated for an ADI at Level 1 for each reporting period.  An ADI that 
is a branch of a foreign bank (i.e. is incorporated in an overseas jurisdiction) 
must provide APRA with the information required by the version of ARF 118.0 
designated for an ADI at Level 1 for each reporting period in relation to the 
Australian branch only. 
6. 
If an ADI to which this Reporting Standard applies that is a bank – advanced or 
applicant advanced, bank – standardised, building society, credit union, or other 
ADI, is part of a Level 2 group, the ADI must also provide APRA with the 
information required by the version of ARF 118.0 designated for an ADI at 
Level 2 for each reporting period, unless the ADI is a subsidiary of an 
authorised NOHC.  If the ADI is a subsidiary of an authorised NOHC, the 
ADI’s immediate parent NOHC must provide APRA with the information 
required by that form for each reporting period.  In doing so, the immediate 
parent NOHC must comply with this Reporting Standard (other than paragraphs 
5 and 12) as if it were the relevant ADI.  
Forms and method of submission 
7. 
The information required by this Reporting Standard must be given to APRA in 
electronic format, using the ‘Direct to APRA’ application or by a method 
notified by APRA, in writing, prior to submission. 
Note: the Direct to APRA application software (also known as D2A) may be obtained from 
APRA.  
Authorised Version F2018L00363 registered 23/03/2018
 
 
April 2018 
 
 
ARS 118.0 - 3 
Reporting periods and due dates 
8. 
Subject to paragraph 9, an ADI to which this Reporting Standard applies must 
provide the information required by this Reporting Standard in respect of each 
quarter based on the financial year (within the meaning of the Corporations Act 
2001) of the ADI. 
9. 
APRA may, by notice in writing, change the reporting periods, or specified 
reporting periods, for a particular ADI, to require it to provide the information 
required by this Reporting Standard more frequently, or less frequently, having 
regard to:  
(a) 
the particular circumstances of the ADI;  
(b) 
the extent to which the information is required for the purposes of the 
prudential supervision of the ADI; and 
(c) 
the requirements of the Reserve Bank of Australia or the Australian 
Bureau of Statistics.  
10. 
The information required by this Reporting Standard must be provided to APRA 
in accordance with the table below.   The right hand column of the table sets out 
the number of business days after the end of the reporting period to which the 
information relates, within which information must be submitted to APRA by 
an ADI in each of the classes set out in the same row in the left hand column. 
Class of ADI 
Number of 
business days 
Bank – Advanced or Applicant Advanced 
30 
Bank – Standardised  
20 
Branch of a Foreign Bank 
20 
Building Society 
15 
Credit Union 
15 
Provider of Purchased Payment Facilities 
Not applicable 
Other ADI1 
20 
  
11. 
APRA may grant an ADI an extension of a due date in writing, in which case 
the new due date for the provision of the information will be the date on the 
notice of extension.  
Quality control 
12. 
All information provided by an ADI under this Reporting Standard (except for 
the information required under paragraph 6) must be the product of systems, 
processes and controls that have been reviewed and tested by the external 
auditor of the ADI as set out in Prudential Standards APS 310 Audit and 
Related Matters. Relevant standards and guidance statements issued by the 
                                                           
1  
The definitions of ‘credit union’ and ‘other ADI’ in paragraph 17 of this Reporting Standard 
provide that Cairns Penny Savings and Loans Limited is to be treated in accordance with the 
reporting period requirements applicable to credit unions. 
Authorised Version F2018L00363 registered 23/03/2018
 
 
April 2018 
 
 
ARS 118.0 - 4 
Auditing and Assurance Standards Board provide information on the scope and 
nature of the review and testing required from external auditors. This review 
and testing must be done on an annual basis or more frequently if necessary to 
enable the external auditor to form an opinion on the accuracy and reliability of 
the information provided by an ADI under this Reporting Standard.  
13. 
All information provided by an ADI under this Reporting Standard must be 
subject to processes and controls developed by the ADI for the internal review 
and authorisation of that information. These systems, processes and controls are 
to assure the completeness and reliability of the information provided. 
Authorisation 
14. 
When an officer of an ADI submits information under this Reporting Standard 
using the D2A application, or other method notified by APRA, it will be 
necessary for the officer to digitally sign the relevant information using a digital 
certificate acceptable to APRA. 
Minor alterations to forms and instructions 
15. 
APRA may make minor variations to:  
(a) 
a form that is part of this Reporting Standard, and the instructions to such 
a form, to correct technical, programming or logical errors, 
inconsistencies or anomalies; or 
(b) 
the instructions to a form, to clarify their application to the form 
without changing any substantive requirement in the form or instructions. 
16. 
If APRA makes such a variation it must notify in writing each ADI that is 
required to report under this Reporting Standard. 
Interpretation 
17. 
In this Reporting Standard: 
AASB has the meaning in section 9 of the Corporations Act 2001. 
ADI means an authorised deposit-taking institution within the meaning of the 
Banking Act 1959. 
APRA means the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority established under 
the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority Act 1998. 
Australian-owned bank means a locally incorporated ADI that assumes or uses 
the word ‘bank’ in relation to its banking business and is not a foreign 
subsidiary bank. 
authorised NOHC has the meaning given in the Banking Act 1959. 
Authorised Version F2018L00363 registered 23/03/2018
 
 
April 2018 
 
 
ARS 118.0 - 5 
bank – advanced or applicant advanced means an Australian-owned bank or a 
foreign subsidiary bank that has APRA’s approval or is seeking APRA’s 
approval to use an internal ratings-based approach to credit risk and/or an 
advanced measurement approach to operational risk for capital adequacy 
purposes. 
bank – standardised means an Australian-owned bank or a foreign subsidiary 
bank that uses the standardised approaches to credit risk and/or an advanced 
measurement approach to operational risk for capital adequacy purposes in 
respect of the whole of its operations. 
branch of a foreign bank means a ‘foreign ADI’ as defined in section 5 of the 
Banking Act 1959. 
building society means a locally incorporated ADI that assumes or uses the 
expression ‘building society’ in relation to its banking business. 
business days means ordinary business days, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays 
and public holidays. 
class of ADI means each of the following: 
(i) 
bank – advanced or applicant advanced; 
(ii) 
bank – standardised; 
(iii) branch of a foreign bank; 
(iv) building society; 
(v) 
credit union; 
(vi) other ADI; and 
(vii) provider of purchased payment facilities. 
credit union means a locally incorporated ADI that assumes or uses the 
expression ‘credit union’ in relation to its banking business and, for the 
purposes of this Reporting Standard, includes Cairns Penny Savings and Loans 
Limited. 
foreign ADI has the meaning in section 5 of the Banking Act 1959. 
foreign subsidiary bank means a locally incorporated ADI in which a bank that 
is not locally incorporated has a stake of more than 15%. 
immediate parent NOHC means an authorised NOHC, or a subsidiary of an 
authorised NOHC, that is an immediate parent NOHC within the meaning of 
paragraph 21(b) of Prudential Standard APS 110 Capital Adequacy (APS 110). 
Level 1 has the meaning in APS 001. 
Authorised Version F2018L00363 registered 23/03/2018
 
 
April 2018 
 
 
ARS 118.0 - 6 
Level 2 has the meaning in APS 001. 
locally incorporated means incorporated in Australia or in a State or Territory 
of Australia, by or under a Commonwealth, State or Territory law. 
other ADI means an ADI that is not an Australian-owned bank, a branch of a 
foreign bank, a building society, a credit union, a foreign subsidiary bank or a 
provider of purchased payment facilities, but for the purposes of this Reporting 
Standard does not include Cairns Penny Savings and Loans Limited. 
provider of purchased payment facilities means an ADI that is subject to a 
condition on its authority under section 9 of the Banking Act 1959 confining the 
banking business that the ADI is authorised to carry on to providing purchased 
payment facilities. 
reporting period means a period mentioned in paragraph 8 or, if applicable, 
paragraph 9. 
stake means a stake determined under the Financial Sector Shareholdings Act 
1998, as if the only associates that were taken into account under paragraph (b) 
of subclause 10(1) of the Schedule to that Act were those set out in paragraphs 
(h), (j) and (l) of subclause 4(1). 
subsidiary has the meaning in section 9 of  the Corporations Act 2001. 
18. 
Unless the contrary intention appears, a reference to an Act, Prudential 
Standard, Reporting Standard, Australian Accounting or Auditing Standard is a 
reference to the instrument as in force from time to time.  
19. 
APRA may make a determination in writing that an individual ADI of one class 
of ADI is to be treated, for the purposes of this Reporting Standard, as though it 
was an ADI of another class of ADI. 
 
Authorised Version F2018L00363 registered 23/03/2018
April 2018 
 
 
ARF 118.0 - 1 
 
Australian Business Number
Institution Name
Reporting Period
Scale Factor
Reporting Consolidation
ARF_118_0: Off-balance Sheet Business
Millions to one decimal place for banks
Whole dollars no decimal place for other ADIs
Level 1/Level 2
Authorised Version F2018L00363 registered 23/03/2018
April 2018 
 
 
ARF 118.0 - 2 
 
Table 1. Trading Book
Principal 
Amount (1.1)
Fair Value (1.2)
Principal 
Amount (2.1)
Fair Value (2.2)
Principal 
Amount (3.1)
Fair Value 
(3.2)
Principal 
Amount (4.1)
Fair Value 
(4.2)
1.1. Exchange-traded derivatives (traded on recognised 
exchanges)
1.2. Over-The-Counter Derivatives (e.g. forwards, 
swaps, options)
1.2.1. Forwards
1.2.2. Swaps
1.2.3. Bought option positions
1.2.4. Written option positions
1.2.5. Credit derivatives - bought protection
1.2.6. Credit derivatives - sold protection
1.2.7. Other
1.3. Total
1.3.1. of which: Derivatives with
1.3.1.1. Parent entity
1.3.1.2. Controlled entities 
1.3.1.3. Associates / joint ventures
1.3.1.4. Other related parties
Other Derivative Contracts 
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Interest Rate Contracts
Foreign Exchange Contracts 
Equity Contracts 
Section A: Statement of Derivative Activity
Authorised Version F2018L00363 registered 23/03/2018
April 2018 
 
 
ARF 118.0 - 3 
 
Table 2. Banking Book
Principal 
Amount (1.1)
Fair Value (1.2)
Principal 
Amount (2.1)
Fair Value (2.2)
Principal 
Amount (3.1)
Fair Value 
(3.2)
Principal 
Amount (4.1)
Fair Value 
(4.2)
2.1. Exchange-traded derivatives (traded on recognised 
exchanges)
2.2. Over-The-Counter Derivatives (e.g. Forwards, 
Swaps, Options)
2.2.1. Forwards
2.2.2. Swaps
2.2.3. Bought option positions
2.2.4. Written option positions
2.2.5. Credit derivatives - bought protection
2.2.6. Credit derivatives - sold protection
2.2.7. Other
2.3. Total
2.3.1. of which: Derivatives with
2.3.1.1. Parent entity
2.3.1.2. Controlled entities 
2.3.1.3. Associates / joint ventures
2.3.1.4. Other related parties
(4)
(1)
(2)
Interest Rate Contracts
Foreign Exchange Contracts 
Equity Contracts 
Other Derivative Contracts 
(3)
Authorised Version F2018L00363 registered 23/03/2018
April 2018 
 
 
ARF 118.0 - 4 
 
 
 
Approved 
balance 
available (1)
Undrawn 
balance 
available (2)
1.1. Standby Facilities
1. Off-balance sheet liquidity support facilities contracted by the ADI
2.3. Other
2. Value of charge / security that has been granted over assets of the ADI
1.1.1. Facilities with same day draw down
2.1. Fixed charge
Section B: Off-balance sheet liquidity support facilities
1.6. Total off-balance sheet liquidity support facilities
1.6.1. of which: Facilities with related entities
2.2. Floating charge
1.1.2. Facilities with 2 - 5 day draw down
1.1.3. Facilities with greater than 5 day draw down
1.2. Bill acceptance / discount facilities
1.3. Letter of credit facilities
1.4. Overdrafts  
1.5. Other liquidity support facilities
Authorised Version F2018L00363 registered 23/03/2018
 
 
April 2018 
 
ARF 118.0 Instructions – 1 
Reporting Form ARF 118.0  
Off-balance Sheet Business 
Instruction Guide 
This instruction guide is designed to assist in the completion of Reporting Form ARF 
118.0 - Off-balance Sheet Business (ARF 118.0). This form collects information on an 
authorised deposit-taking institution’s (ADI’s) off-balance sheet business relating to: 
 
(a) 
derivative activities in the ADI’s trading and banking books; and 
 
(b) 
liquidity support facilities contracted by the ADI to supplement its liquidity 
management and the value of any charges granted over the assets of the ADI to 
secure these contingent liabilities. 
 
The information collected in this form is not used for the calculation of regulatory 
capital relating to an ADI’s off-balance sheet business.   
 
In completing this form, ADIs should refer to Prudential Standard APS 112 Capital 
Adequacy: Standardised Approach to Credit Risk (APS 112) or Prudential Standard 
APS 113 Capital Adequacy: Internal Ratings-based Approach to Credit Risk (APS 
113), as appropriate. 
 
 
General directions and notes 
Reporting entity 
This form is to be completed at Level 1 and Level 21 by each ADI (subject to the 
paragraph following the table) that is included in one of the classes of ADI to which 
this form applies, as set out in the table below: 
 
Class of ADI 
Reporting 
required 
Bank – Advanced or Applicant Advanced2 
Yes 
Bank – Standardised  
Yes 
Branch of a Foreign Bank 
Yes3  
Building Society 
Yes 
Credit Union 
Yes 
Provider of Purchased Payment Facilities 
No 
                                                           
1  
Level 1 and Level 2 are defined in accordance with Prudential Standard APS 001 Definitions. 
2  
When an ADI is seeking APRA’s approval to use the internal ratings-based approach to credit 
risk and/or an advanced measurement approach to operational risk, and is therefore classified as 
a “Bank – Advanced or Applicant Advanced”, the ADI may concurrently be classified as a 
“Bank – Standardised”. In this case, the ADI must comply with the requirements and 
timeframes for a “Bank – Advanced or Applicant Advanced”. 
3  
A branch of a foreign bank is required to complete this form for the Australian branch only. 
Authorised Version F2018L00363 registered 23/03/2018
 
 
April 2018 
 
ARF 118.0 Instructions – 2 
Other ADI 
Yes 
 
If an ADI is a subsidiary of an authorised non-operating holding company (NOHC), 
the report at Level 2 is to be provided by the ADI’s immediate parent NOHC.4 
Securitisation deconsolidation principle 
Except as otherwise specified in these instructions, the following applies: 
 
1. 
Where an ADI (or a member of its Level 2 consolidated group) participates in a 
securitisation that meets APRA’s operational requirements for regulatory capital 
relief under Prudential Standard APS 120 Securitisation (APS 120): 
(a) 
special purpose vehicles (SPVs) holding securitised assets may be treated 
as non-consolidated independent third parties for regulatory reporting 
purposes, irrespective of whether the SPVs (or their assets) are 
consolidated for accounting purposes; 
(b) 
the assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses of the relevant SPVs may be 
excluded from the ADI’s reported amounts in APRA’s regulatory 
reporting returns; and 
(c) 
the underlying exposures (i.e. the pool) under such a securitisation may be 
excluded from the calculation of the regulatory capital (refer to APS 120). 
However, the ADI must still hold regulatory capital for the securitisation 
exposures5 that it retains or acquires and such exposures are to be reported 
in Reporting Form ARF 120.1 Securitisation – Regulatory Capital. The 
risk-weighted assets (RWA) relating to such securitisation exposures must 
also be reported in Reporting Form ARF 110.0.1 Capital Adequacy (Level 
1) and Reporting Form ARF 110.0.2 Capital Adequacy (Level 2). 
2. 
Where an ADI (or a member of its Level 2 consolidated group) participates in a 
securitisation that does not meet APRA’s operational requirements for 
regulatory capital relief under APS 120, or the ADI undertakes a funding-only 
securitisation or synthetic securitisation such exposures are to be reported as on-
balance sheet assets in APRA’s regulatory reporting returns. In addition, these 
exposures must also be reported as a part of the ADI’s total securitised assets 
within Reporting Form ARF 120.2 Securitisation – Supplementary Items. 
Reporting period and timeframes for lodgement 
The form is to be completed as at the last day of the stated reporting period (i.e. the 
relevant) quarter. The table below sets out the number of business days after the end 
of the relevant reporting period, within which each class of ADI must submit data to 
APRA. 
 
                                                           
4  
Refer to paragraph 6 of Reporting Standard ARS 118.0 Off-balance Sheet Business. 
5  
Securitisation exposures are defined in accordance with APS 120. 
Authorised Version F2018L00363 registered 23/03/2018
 
 
April 2018 
 
ARF 118.0 Instructions – 3 
Class of ADI 
Number of 
business days 
Bank – Advanced or Applicant Advanced 
30 
Bank – Standardised  
20 
Branch of a Foreign Bank 
20 
Building Society 
15 
Credit Union 
15 
Provider of Purchased Payment Facilities 
Not applicable 
Other ADI6 
20 
 
An immediate parent NOHC must submit data to APRA within the same timeframe as 
its subsidiary ADI. 
Unit of measurement  
This form should be completed in Australian dollars (AUD) and in accordance with 
the units set out for each class of ADI in the table below. 
Class of ADI 
Units 
Bank – Advanced or Applicant Advanced 
Millions of dollars rounded to one 
decimal place 
Bank – Standardised  
Millions of dollars rounded to one 
decimal place 
Branch of a Foreign Bank 
Millions of dollars rounded to one 
decimal place 
Building Society 
Whole dollars with no decimal place 
Credit Union 
Whole dollars with no decimal place 
Provider of Purchased Payment Facilities 
Not applicable 
Other ADI 
Whole dollars with no decimal place 
 
An immediate parent NOHC must complete this form in AUD and in accordance with 
the same units as its subsidiary ADI. 
 
Amounts denominated in foreign currency are to be converted to AUD in accordance 
with AASB 121 The Effects of Changes in Foreign Exchange Rates. 
Definitions 
In this instruction guide and its corresponding reporting form (ARF 118.0), the 
following expressions have the defined meanings as set out below: 
Principal amount 
The principal amount refers to the face value or gross amount of a given off-balance 
sheet transaction and not the fair value. Absolute values should be reported.  Netting, 
as defined in APS 112, should not be applied. 
                                                           
6  
Cairns Penny Savings and Loans Limited is to be treated in accordance with the reporting period 
requirements applicable to credit unions. 
Authorised Version F2018L00363 registered 23/03/2018
 
 
April 2018 
 
ARF 118.0 Instructions – 4 
Fair value 
The fair value is the amount for which an asset could be exchanged, or a liability 
settled, between knowledgeable and willing parties in an arm’s-length transaction.  
The fair value should be able to be determined through observation of similar 
transactions, quoted market prices, independent valuations or if there is no readily 
observable market, through the ability to liquidate the investment or through assessing 
the net present value of future cash flows.    
Record the aggregate fair (or market) value of the derivative exposure/position by 
summing the absolute fair value of each exposure, for each of the items listed. 
For the purposes of valuing derivative exposures, for this form, fair value should 
represent an estimate of the amount, which could be expected to be received from the 
disposal of the derivative instrument in an orderly market, ignoring transaction costs.  
It is not necessarily related to the nominal value of the derivative. 
Market value is defined for accounting purposes as a subset of fair value, where fair 
value means the amount for which an asset could be exchanged, or a liability settled, 
between knowledgeable, willing parties in an arm's-length transaction, and is 
determined as follows: 
(i) 
the quoted market price in an active and liquid market (i.e. market value); or 
(ii) 
when there is infrequent activity in a market, the market is not well established, 
small volumes are traded relative to the asset or liability to be valued, or a 
quoted market price is not available – an estimate of a price for the asset or 
liability in an active and liquid market. 
Trading book  
An ADI that wishes to operate a trading book must submit a trading book policy 
statement to APRA for approval that specifies those activities that belong in the 
trading book (refer to Prudential Standard APS 116 Capital Adequacy: Market Risk 
for details). 
 
Banking book 
The banking book covers all business not included in the trading book. 
 
Specific instructions  
Section A: Statement of Derivative Activity 
The statement of derivative activity is collected for information purposes. The 
information in this section is not directly used for the calculation of an ADI’s credit 
equivalent amounts for market-related off-balance sheet transactions as it does not 
allow for the contracts covered by eligible bilateral netting agreements (refer to APS 
112 for the definition of eligible bilateral netting agreements).  The regulatory capital 
relating to the ADI’s market-related off-balance sheet transactions is captured in 
Authorised Version F2018L00363 registered 23/03/2018
 
 
April 2018 
 
ARF 118.0 Instructions – 5 
Reporting Form ARF 112.2 Standardised Credit Risk – Off-balance Sheet Exposures 
or in the relevant ARF 113 Internal Ratings-based Approach to Credit Risk series of 
forms, depending on the approach an ADI is applying to the calculation of its credit 
risk regulatory capital. 
An ADI should report all derivative activity within its trading and banking books, 
without taking into account netting, as defined in APS 112.  ADIs may consult with 
APRA where they are unclear as to which category is appropriate for a particular 
derivative when reporting the principal amount and fair value of that derivative. 
While not intended as an exhaustive list, derivative instruments may include the 
following: 
Column 1: Interest rate contracts 
Include: 
 
single currency interest rate swaps;  
 
basis swaps; 
 
forward rate agreements; 
 
 interest rate futures;  
 
interest rate options purchased; and  
 
any other instruments of a similar nature. 
Column 2: Foreign exchange contracts (including contracts involving gold) 
Include: 
 
cross currency swaps (including cross currency interest rate swaps); 
 
forward foreign exchange contracts; 
 
currency futures; 
 
currency options purchased; 
 
hedge contracts; and 
 
any other instruments of a similar nature. 
Outstanding spot transactions should be treated as forward foreign exchange 
contracts. 
Column 3: Equity contracts 
Include: 
Authorised Version F2018L00363 registered 23/03/2018
 
 
April 2018 
 
ARF 118.0 Instructions – 6 
 
swaps; 
 
forwards; 
 
futures; 
 
purchased options/warrants; and 
 
similar derivative contracts based on individual equities or equity indices. 
Column 4: Other derivative contracts 
Include: 
 
swaps; 
 
forwards; 
 
purchased options; 
 
similar derivative contracts based on precious metals such as gold, silver, 
platinum and palladium; 
 
energy contracts; 
 
agricultural contracts; 
 
base metals (such as aluminium, copper and zinc); 
 
other non-precious metal commodity contracts; and 
 
any contracts covering other items, that give rise to credit risk.  
This category also includes all credit derivatives in the banking and trading book. 
Section B: Off-balance sheet liquidity support facilities 
The information collected in this section of the form is not included in the calculation 
of an ADI’s regulatory capital. 
1. 
Off-balance sheet liquidity support facilities contracted by the ADI 
This section captures information on liquidity support facilities contracted by the ADI 
to supplement its liquidity management practices. 
Column 1: Approved balance available 
Include the total approved balance of the facility. 
Column 2: Undrawn balance available 
Authorised Version F2018L00363 registered 23/03/2018
 
 
April 2018 
 
ARF 118.0 Instructions – 7 
Include the balance of the facility that has not been used or drawn down by the ADI at 
the reporting date. 
1.1 
Standby facilities 
These facilities are approved and committed to the ADI. Generally, an ADI is 
required to provide written notice to trigger draw down (access to the funds) on these 
facilities. 
1.1.1 Facilities with same day draw down 
Include those standby facilities that can be drawn down (funds accessed) on the same 
day that notice is given by the ADI of its intention to draw down on the standby 
facility. 
1.1.2 Facilities with 2-5 day draw down 
Include those standby facilities that can be drawn down (funds accessed) within two 
to five days after notice is given by the ADI of its intention to draw down on the 
standby facility (i.e. a two to five day waiting period). 
1.1.3 Facilities with greater than 5 days draw down 
Include those standby facilities that can be drawn down (funds accessed) five days 
after notice is given by the ADI of its intention to draw down on the standby facility 
(i.e. a five day waiting period). 
1.2 
Bill acceptance/discount facilities 
These are another form of liquidity/funding. The funding is provided to the ADI by a 
facility that discounts bills (e.g. bank accepted bills). Principal and interest (discount) 
owing on the bill is repaid or ‘rolled over’ by the ADI on maturity of the bill. 
1.3 
Letter of credit facilities 
This is an irrevocable and unconditional undertaking by an ADI to repay principal and 
interest of a loan in the event of default. 
1.4 
Overdrafts 
These are accounts that may be overdrawn up to limits agreed to with an ADI. 
Authorised Version F2018L00363 registered 23/03/2018
 
 
April 2018 
 
ARF 118.0 Instructions – 8 
1.5 
Other liquidity support facilities 
Include all other off-balance sheet liquidity support facilities contracted for the ADI’s 
use that are not included in the categories above. 
1.6.1 Facilities with related entities 
Include liquidity support facilities that are provided to the ADI by its related entities. 
2. 
Value of charge/security that has been granted over assets of the ADI 
2.1 
Fixed charge 
A fixed charge is a form of security provided to the lender relating to a specific asset 
or assets. A fixed charge will generally limit the ability of the ADI to deal with those 
assets (i.e. investment securities). 
2.2 
Floating charge 
This is a charge where the creditor’s charge or claim is not lodged over a particular 
asset, but is fixed on a specific asset (or assets) only if the default occurs. This process 
is called crystallisation of the charge. A floating charge leaves the debtor free to buy, 
sell and vary the assets until such time as the charge is crystallised. 
 
 
Authorised Version F2018L00363 registered 23/03/2018


--- End of file: ARS 118 Off-balance Sheet Business.txt ---

 
 
 
 
 
Financial Sector (Collection of Data) (reporting 
standard) determination No. 7 of 2022  
Reporting Standard ARS 230.0 Commercial Property 
Financial Sector (Collection of Data) Act 2001 
I, Alison Bliss, delegate of APRA, under paragraph 13(1)(a) of the Financial Sector 
(Collection of Data) Act 2001 (the Act) and subsection 33(3) of the Acts Interpretation Act 
1901: 
 
(a) 
revoke Financial Sector (Collection of Data) (reporting standard) determination No. 13 
of 2018, including Reporting Standard ARS 230.0 Commercial Property made under 
that Determination; and 
 
(b) 
determine Reporting Standard ARS 230.0 Commercial Property, in the form set out in 
the Schedule, which applies to the financial sector entities to the extent provided in 
paragraph 3 of the reporting standard.  
 
Under section 15 of the Act, I declare that the reporting standard shall begin to apply to those 
financial sector entities, and the revoked reporting standard shall cease to apply, on the day it 
is registered on the Federal Register of Legislation.  
 
This instrument commences upon registration on the Federal Register of Legislation. 
 
Dated: 23 February 2022 
 
 
 
Alison Bliss 
General Manager 
Data Analytics & Insights Division 
 
 
 
Interpretation 
In this Determination: 
APRA means the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority. 
financial sector entity has the meaning given by section 5 of the Act.  
 
Authorised Version F2022L00227 registered 01/03/2022
 
 
 
 
Schedule  
 
Reporting Standard ARS 230.0 Commercial Property comprises the document commencing 
on the following page. 
Authorised Version F2022L00227 registered 01/03/2022
March 2022 
 
 
 
ARS 230.0 - 1 
 
Reporting Standard ARS 230.0 
Commercial Property 
Objective of this Reporting Standard 
This Reporting Standard is made under section 13 of the Financial Sector (Collection of 
Data) Act 2001 and outlines the overall requirements for the provision of information to 
APRA relating to an authorised deposit-taking institution’s commercial property. It should be 
read in conjunction with the Reporting Form ARF 230.0 Commercial Property, and the 
associated instructions (all of which are attached and form part of this Reporting Standard). 
Authority 
1. 
This Reporting Standard is made under section 13 of the Financial Sector (Collection 
of Data) Act 2001. 
Purpose 
2. 
Data collected in Reporting Form ARF 230.0 Commercial Property (ARF 230.0) is 
used by APRA for the purpose of prudential supervision. It may also be used by the 
Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) and the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS). 
Application and commencement 
3. 
This Reporting Standard applies to an authorised deposit-taking institution (ADI) as set 
out in the table below. 
Class of ADI 
Applicable 
Australian-owned Bank 
Yes 
Foreign Subsidiary Bank 
Yes 
Branch of a Foreign Bank 
Yes 
Building Society 
Yes 
Credit Union 
Yes 
Other ADI 
Yes 
 
4. 
This Reporting Standard applies for reporting periods ending on or after 31 January 
2022. 
Authorised Version F2022L00227 registered 01/03/2022
March 2022 
 
 
 
ARS 230.0 - 2 
Information required 
5. 
An Australian-owned bank, foreign subsidiary bank and branch of a foreign bank must 
provide APRA with the following information for each reporting period: 
(a) 
if the ADI is the highest parent entity in relation to a consolidated ADI group – 
the information required by the version of ARF 230.0 designated ‘Consolidated 
Group or Licensed ADI for Banks’, completed on a consolidated group basis; or 
(b) 
if the ADI is not a highest parent entity in relation to a consolidated ADI group – 
the information required by the version of ARF 230.0 designated ‘Consolidated 
Group or Licensed ADI for Banks’, completed on a licensed ADI basis. 
Note: Paragraph (b) will apply to a branch of a foreign ADI (as well as to a certain Australian-owned 
banks and foreign subsidiary banks).  
6. 
An ADI that is a building society, credit union, other ADI or Cairns Penny Savings & 
Loans Ltd, must provide APRA with the following information for each reporting 
period: 
(a) 
the information required by the version of ARF 230.0 designated for a 
‘Consolidated Group and Licensed ADI for other ADIs’, completed on a licensed 
ADI basis; and 
(b) 
if the ADI is the highest parent entity in relation to a consolidated ADI group – 
the information required by the version of ARF 230.0 designated for a 
‘Consolidated Group and Licensed ADI for other ADIs’, completed on a 
consolidated group basis. 
Form and method of submission 
7. 
The information required by this Reporting Standard must be given to APRA in 
electronic format using an electronic method available on APRA’s website or by a 
method notified by APRA prior to submission.  
Reporting periods and due dates 
8. 
Subject to paragraph 9, an ADI to which this Reporting Standard applies must provide 
the information required by this Reporting Standard for reporting periods comprising 
each 6-month period ending 30 September and 31 March.  
9. 
APRA may, by notice in writing, change the reporting periods, or specified reporting 
periods, for a particular ADI, to require it to provide the information required by this 
Reporting Standard more frequently, or less frequently, having regard to:  
(a) 
the particular circumstances of the ADI;  
(b) 
the extent to which the information is required for the purposes of the prudential 
supervision of the ADI; and 
(c) 
the requirements of the RBA or the ABS.  
Authorised Version F2022L00227 registered 01/03/2022
March 2022 
 
 
 
ARS 230.0 - 3 
10. 
The information required by this Reporting Standard must be provided to APRA by 35 
calendar days after the end of the reporting period to which the information relates. 
11. 
APRA may grant an ADI an extension of a due date in writing, in which case the new 
due date for the provision of the information will be the due date specified on the notice 
of extension.  
Quality control 
12. 
All information provided by an ADI under this Reporting Standard (except for the 
information required under paragraphs 5(a) and 6(b)) must be the product of systems, 
processes and controls that have been reviewed and tested by the external auditor of the 
ADI as set out in Prudential Standard APS 310 Audit and Related Matters. Relevant 
standards and guidance statements issued by the Auditing and Assurance Standards 
Board provide information on the scope and nature of the review and testing required 
from external auditors. This review and testing must be done on an annual basis or 
more frequently if required by the external auditor to enable the external auditor to 
form an opinion on the accuracy and reliability of the information provided by an ADI 
under this Reporting Standard.  
13. 
All information provided by an ADI under this Reporting Standard must be subject to 
processes and controls developed by the ADI for the internal review and authorisation 
of that information. These systems, processes and controls are to assure the 
completeness and reliability of the information provided. 
Authorisation 
14. 
When an officer or agent of an ADI submits information under this Reporting Standard 
using a method notified by APRA, it will be necessary for the officer or agent to 
digitally sign the relevant information using a digital certificate acceptable to APRA. 
Minor alterations to forms and instructions 
15. 
APRA may make minor variations to:  
(a) 
a form that is part of this Reporting Standard, and the instructions to such a form, 
to correct technical, programming or logical errors, inconsistencies or anomalies; 
or 
(b) 
the instructions to a form, to clarify their application to the form 
without changing any substantive requirement in the form or instructions. 
16. 
If APRA makes such a variation it must notify in writing each ADI that is required to 
report under this Reporting Standard. 
Interpretation  
17. 
In this Reporting Standard: 
Authorised Version F2022L00227 registered 01/03/2022
March 2022 
 
 
 
ARS 230.0 - 4 
AASB has the meaning in section 9 of the Corporations Act 2001. 
AASB 127 means the Australian accounting standards AASB 127 Consolidated and 
Separate Financial Statements made by the Australian Accounting Standards Board. 
ADI means an authorised deposit-taking institution within the meaning of the Banking 
Act 1959. 
APRA means the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority established under the 
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority Act 1998. 
Australian-owned bank means a locally incorporated ADI that assumes or uses the 
word ‘bank’ in relation to its banking business and is not a foreign subsidiary bank. 
branch of a foreign bank means a ‘foreign ADI’ as defined in section 5 of the Banking 
Act 1959. 
building society means a locally incorporated ADI that assumes or uses the expression 
‘building society’ in relation to its banking business.  
business days means ordinary business days, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and 
public holidays. 
class of ADI means each of the following: 
(i) 
Australian-owned bank; 
(ii) 
foreign subsidiary bank; 
(iii) 
branch of a foreign bank; 
(iv) 
building society; 
(v) 
credit union; and  
(vi) 
other ADI. 
consolidated ADI group means a group comprising:  
(a) 
an ADI that is a highest parent entity; and  
(b) 
each subsidiary (within the meaning of Accounting Standard AASB 127) of that 
ADI, whether the subsidiary is locally-incorporated or not, other than a subsidiary 
that is excluded by the instructions attached to this standard. 
credit union means a locally incorporated ADI that assumes or uses the expression 
‘credit union’ in relation to its banking business and includes Cairns Penny Savings & 
Loans Limited. 
due date means the relevant due date under paragraph 10 or, if applicable, paragraph 
11. 
foreign ADI has the meaning in section 5 of the Banking Act 1959. 
Authorised Version F2022L00227 registered 01/03/2022
March 2022 
 
 
 
ARS 230.0 - 5 
foreign subsidiary bank means a locally incorporated ADI in which a bank that is not 
locally incorporated has a stake of more than 15 per cent. 
highest parent entity means an ADI that satisfies all of the following conditions:  
(a) 
it is locally-incorporated;  
(b) 
it has at least one subsidiary (within the meaning of Accounting Standard AASB 
127); and  
(c) 
it is not itself a subsidiary (within the meaning of Accounting Standard AASB 
127) of an ADI that is locally-incorporated. 
locally incorporated means incorporated in Australia or in a State or Territory of 
Australia, by or under a Commonwealth, State or territory law. 
other ADI means an ADI that is not an Australian-owned bank, a branch of a foreign 
bank, a building society, a credit union or a foreign subsidiary bank but does not 
include Cairns Penny Savings & Loans Limited. 
Reporting Category A has the meaning given by Reporting Standard ARS 701.0 
ABS/RBA Definitions for the EFS Collection (ARS 701.0). 
Reporting Category B has the meaning given by ARS 701.0. 
reporting period means a period mentioned in paragraph 8 or, if applicable, paragraph 
9. 
stake means a stake determined under the Financial Sector (Shareholdings) Act 1998, 
as if the only associates that were taken into account under paragraph (b) of subclause 
10(1) of the Schedule to that Act were those set out in paragraphs (h), (j) and (l) of 
subclause 4(1). 
18. 
Unless the contrary intention appears, a reference to an Act, Prudential Standard, 
Reporting Standard, Australian Accounting or Auditing Standard is a reference to the 
instrument as in force or existing from time to time.  
Authorised Version F2022L00227 registered 01/03/2022
March 2022 
 
 
ARF 230.0 - 1 
 
 
ARF_230_0: Commercial Property 
 
Australian Business Number 
Institution Name 
 
 
Reporting Period 
Scale Factor  
Quarterly 
Millions to one decimal place for Reporting Category B ADIs 
Whole dollars no decimal place for Reporting Category A ADIs 
 
Reporting Consolidation 
 
Group Book / Solo Book 
 
 
Part A: Commercial property 
 
 
Australia 
 
Total 
exposure 
limits 
Total 
actual 
exposures 
Non-performing exposures 
 
Well secured 
Not well secured or unsecured 
 
Balance 
outstanding 
Specific 
provisions 
Security 
held 
Balance 
outstanding 
Specific 
provisions 
Security 
held 
Office 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Retail 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Industrial 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Land development/subdivisions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other residential 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tourism & leisure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Authorised Version F2022L00227 registered 01/03/2022
March 2022 
 
 
ARF 230.0 - 2 
 
 
 
Overseas 
 
Total 
exposure 
limits 
Total 
actual 
exposures 
Non-performing exposures 
 
Well secured 
Not well secured or unsecured 
 
Balance 
outstanding 
Specific 
provisions 
Security 
held 
Balance 
outstanding 
Specific 
provisions 
Security 
held 
Office 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Retail 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Industrial 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Land development/subdivisions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other residential 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tourism & leisure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part B: ADIs’ own investment in commercial property 
 
 
Australia 
 
Carrying value 
Write-offs during reporting period 
 
Written-off 
directly to P&L 
Written-off 
against  
provisions/asset 
revaluation 
reserve 
Office 
 
 
 
Authorised Version F2022L00227 registered 01/03/2022
March 2022 
 
 
ARF 230.0 - 3 
Retail 
 
 
 
Industrial 
 
 
 
Land development/subdivisions 
 
 
 
Other residential 
 
 
 
Tourism & leisure 
 
 
 
Other 
 
 
 
Total 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Overseas 
 
Carrying value 
Write-offs during reporting period 
 
Written-off 
directly to P&L 
Written-off 
against  
provisions/asset 
revaluation 
reserve 
Office 
 
 
 
Retail 
 
 
 
Industrial 
 
 
 
Land development/subdivisions 
 
 
 
Other residential 
 
 
 
Tourism & leisure 
 
 
 
Other 
 
 
 
Total 
 
 
 
 
 
Authorised Version F2022L00227 registered 01/03/2022
March 2022 
 
 
ARF 230.0 Instructions - 1 
 
Reporting Form ARF 230.0  
Commercial Property 
Instruction Guide 
This instruction guide is designed to assist in the completion of the Commercial Property 
form. The authorised deposit-taking institution’s (ADI’s) exposure to commercial property in 
“Australia” and “Overseas” is required to be reported separately in the form (both Parts A 
and B). 
General directions and notes 
Reporting entity 
This form is to be completed by all Australian-owned banks and foreign subsidiary banks on 
either a licensed ADI or consolidated ADI group basis (where applicable).  
Branches of foreign banks operating through branches in Australia are required to complete 
this form on a licensed ADI basis only. 
Credit Unions, Cairns Penny Savings & Loans Limited, Building Societies and other ADIs 
are to complete this form on both a licensed ADI and consolidated ADI group basis (where 
applicable). 
Licensed ADI 
This refers to the operations of the reporting ADI on a stand-alone basis. 
Securitisation deconsolidation principle  
Except as otherwise specified in these instructions, the following applies: 
1. 
Where an ADI (or a member of its Level 2 consolidated group) participates in a 
securitisation that meets APRA’s operational requirements for regulatory capital relief 
under Prudential Standard APS 120 Securitisation (APS 120): 
(a) 
special purpose vehicles (SPVs) holding securitised assets may be treated as non-
consolidated independent third parties for regulatory reporting purposes, 
irrespective of whether the SPVs (or their assets) are consolidated for accounting 
purposes; 
(b) 
the assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses of the relevant SPVs may be 
excluded from the ADI’s reported amounts in APRA’s regulatory reporting 
returns; and 
(c) 
the underlying exposures (i.e. the pool) under such a securitisation may be 
excluded from the calculation of the ADI’s regulatory capital (refer to APS 120). 
Authorised Version F2022L00227 registered 01/03/2022
March 2022 
 
 
ARF 230.0 Instructions - 2 
However, the ADI must still hold regulatory capital for the securitisation 
exposures1 that it retains or acquires and such exposures are to be reported in 
Reporting Form ARF 120.1 Securitisation – Regulatory Capital. The risk-
weighted assets (RWA) relating to such securitisation exposures must also be 
reported in Reporting Form ARF 110.0.1 Capital Adequacy (Level 1) and 
Reporting Form ARF 110.0.2 Capital Adequacy (Level 2). 
2. 
Where an ADI (or a member of its Level 2 consolidated group) participates in a 
securitisation that does not meet APRA’s operational requirements for regulatory 
capital relief under APS 120, or the ADI undertakes a funding-only securitisation or 
synthetic securitisation, such exposures are to be reported as on-balance sheet assets in 
APRA’s regulatory reporting returns. In addition, these exposures must also be reported 
as a part of the ADI’s total securitised assets within Reporting Form ARF 120.2 
Securitisation – Supplementary Items.  
Consolidated ADI group 
This refers to the global operations of the ADI and all its controlled entities (where relevant), 
consolidated in accordance with Australian accounting standards (AASB 127 Consolidated 
and Separate Financial Statements (AASB 127) and AASB 3 Business Combinations (AASB 
3)).  
‘Controlled entity’, ‘parent entity’ 
These terms are defined in accordance with AASB 127 and AASB 3. 
The basis of consolidation required in this form is in accordance with the prudential 
consolidated ADI group. The prudential consolidated group should also be determined in 
accordance with Australian accounting standards, notably AASB 127 and AASB 3 with the 
following modifications: 
1. 
Include the following:  
 
all controlled banking entities, securities entities and other financial entities (e.g. 
finance companies, money market corporations, stockbrokers and leasing companies. 
2. 
Exclude subsidiary entities involved in the following business activities: 
 
insurance businesses (including friendly societies and health funds); 
 
acting as manager, responsible entity, approved trustee, trustee or similar role in 
relation to funds management or the securitisation of assets;  
 
non-financial (commercial) operations; and 
 
SPVs that meet APRA’s operational requirements for regulatory capital relief under 
APS 120. 
Reporting period 
                                                      
1  
Securitisation exposures are defined in accordance with APS 120. 
Authorised Version F2022L00227 registered 01/03/2022
March 2022 
 
 
ARF 230.0 Instructions - 3 
The form is to be completed as at the last day of the relevant reporting period. All ADIs 
should submit the completed form to APRA within 35 calendar days after the end of the 
relevant reporting period. 
Unit of measurement 
Australian-owned banks, foreign subsidiary banks and branches of foreign banks are asked to 
complete the form in millions of Australian dollars rounded to one decimal place. Other 
ADIs, Building Societies, Credit Unions and Cairns Penny Savings & Loans Limited are 
asked to complete the form in whole Australian dollars (no decimal place).  
Amounts denominated in foreign currency are to be converted to AUD in accordance with 
AASB 121 The Effects of Changes in Foreign Exchange Rates (AASB 121). 
The general requirements of AASB 121 for translation are: 
1. 
foreign currency monetary items outstanding at the reporting date must be translated at 
the spot rate at the reporting date;2 
2. 
foreign currency non-monetary items that are measured at historical cost in a foreign 
currency must be translated using the exchange rate at the date of the transaction;3 
3. 
foreign currency non-monetary items that are measured at fair value will be translated 
at the exchange rate at the date when fair value was determined.  
Transactions arising under foreign currency derivative contracts at the reporting date 
must be prepared in accordance with AASB 139 Financial Instruments: Recognition 
and Measurement (AASB 139). However, those foreign currency derivatives that are 
not within the scope of AASB 139 (e.g. some foreign currency derivatives that are 
embedded in other contracts) remain within the scope of AASB 121. 
For APRA purposes equity items must be translated using the foreign currency 
exchange rate at the date of investment or acquisition.  Post acquisition changes in 
equity are required to be translated on the date of the movement. 
As foreign currency derivatives are measured at fair value, the currency derivative 
contracts are translated at the spot rate at the reporting date.  
Exchange differences should be recognised in profit and loss in the period which they 
arise. For foreign currency derivatives, the exchange differences would be recognised 
immediately in profit and loss if the hedging instrument is a fair value hedge. For 
derivatives used in a cash flow hedge, the exchange differences should be recognised 
directly in equity.  
                                                      
2 
Monetary items are defined to mean units of currency held and assets and liabilities to be received or 
paid in a fixed or determinable number of units of currency. Spot rate means the exchange rate for 
immediate delivery. 
3 
Examples of non-monetary items include amounts prepaid for goods and services (e.g. prepaid rent); 
goodwill; intangible assets; physical assets; and provisions that are to be settled by the delivery of a non-
monetary asset. 
Authorised Version F2022L00227 registered 01/03/2022
March 2022 
 
 
ARF 230.0 Instructions - 4 
The ineffective portion of the exchange differences in all hedges would be recognised 
in profit and loss. 
4. 
translation of financial reports of foreign operations. 
A foreign operation is defined in AASB 121 as meaning an entity that is a subsidiary, 
associate, joint venture or branch of a reporting entity, the activities of which are based 
or conducted in a country or currency other than those of the reporting entity. 
 
Exchange differences relating to foreign currency monetary items that form part 
of the net investment of an entity in a foreign operation, must be recognised as a 
separate component of equity.  
 
Translation of financial reports should otherwise follow the requirements in 
AASB 121. 
Netting 
Amounts should be reported without any adjustment for netting arrangements.  
Reporting threshold 
Bank ADIs: 
For the purposes of this report, only include commercial property exposures which exceed 
AUD $250,000. 
Non-bank ADIs:  
For the purposes of this report, include total commercial property exposures irrespective of 
the dollar amount. 
Definition 
Commercial property exposure is defined according to the nature of the risk. An exposure 
should be classified as commercial property risk, if the exposure is subject to the performance 
of the property market. 
For reporting purposes, a commercial property exposure exists when a facility has been 
provided for the development, acquisition or improvement of landed property (real estate), 
and the servicing and repayment of the facility is dependent on the cash flows generated by 
the property itself through sale or rental income, and/or from cash flows generated from other 
properties owned by the borrower. 
The following points may assist to further clarify this general definition: 
 
The definition excludes residential property loans for owner occupation and loans to 
individuals or families for investment in residential property. 
 
Exclude loans to private family companies and/or family trusts where the residence is 
occupied by the directors or principal beneficiaries of the family trust. 
Authorised Version F2022L00227 registered 01/03/2022
March 2022 
 
 
ARF 230.0 Instructions - 5 
 
Exclude loans to builders, construction companies or sub-contractors who are paid for 
the execution of their contracts by a third party and not out of the sale or rental of the 
property upon completion. If, however, they assume development risk, whether 
recognised as a developer or not, the exposure is classified as property exposure. 
 
Rural exposures will generally not meet the definition of commercial property, unless 
the property has been acquired specifically for lease or resale, and where the servicing 
of the debt is dependent on such lease or resale (and/or the lease or resale of other 
properties). 
 
Facilities to investment companies, property management companies and unit trusts 
whose success in business (and therefore the servicing and repayment of the debt) is 
predominantly dependent upon the performance of the property market are included in 
commercial property exposure. 
 
Facilities provided for the acquisition of property to be used for generating income 
other than through rental or sale are classified under the industry from which the cash 
flow servicing the debt is derived. In such owner-occupied properties where part of the 
debt servicing is derived from rental income, the classification depends on the 
predominant source of debt servicing. If most of the servicing is by way of income 
derived from the owner’s business, the exposure is classified under that business. 
However, if most of the servicing derives from the property itself, it is a property 
exposure. 
The Australian and New Zealand Standard Industrial Classification (ANZSIC) codes may be 
used as a guide. Although ANZSIC was not developed for this purpose, property exposures 
will generally be to enterprises classified under ANZSIC 771 (Property Operators and 
Developers), and exclude those under subdivision 57 (Accommodation, Cafes and 
Restaurants).  Also excluded are loans to enterprises classified under subdivision 41 (General 
Construction) unless they assume the development risk, as described above. 
The complete ANZSIC listing is an Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) publication 
(Catalogue No. 1292.0) – February 2006. 
Specific instructions 
Part A – Commercial property 
Total exposure limits 
When calculating total exposure limits, do not include internal limits, which have not been 
formally advised to a client and may be cancelled at the reporting ADI’s discretion. 
Authorised Version F2022L00227 registered 01/03/2022
March 2022 
 
 
ARF 230.0 Instructions - 6 
Total actual exposures 
When calculating total actual exposures, the exposure should include: 
 
claims and commitments recorded on-balance sheet; and  
 
the credit equivalent amounts of off-balance sheet claims and commitments. 
Non-performing exposures 
The definition of non-performing exposures should be consistent with the methodology used 
to compile the information for Reporting Standard ARS 220.0 Credit Exposures and 
Provisions. Specific provisions and security held against these exposures are also requested. 
Commercial property classifications 
The information required for total exposure limits, total actual exposures, non-performing 
exposures (balance outstanding, specific provisions & security held) are to be classified 
according to the type of commercial property market/categories to which the ADI is exposed. 
The categories that the exposures are to be classified in this form are listed below: 
1. 
office;  
2. 
retail – includes retail shops, restaurants, shopping centres, petrol stations, etc; 
3. 
industrial - includes warehouses and factories; 
4. 
land development and subdivisions; 
5. 
other residential - includes residential exposures not excluded by point 1 in the general 
instructions; 
6. 
tourism and leisure - includes hotels, motels and lodgings, recreational and sporting 
facilities, hotel developments, time-share developments and other hospitality industries; 
and 
7. 
other - includes other property exposures not elsewhere covered (e.g. health, education 
related, churches, infrastructure, etc). 
An ADI’s own investment in commercial property (such as equity investments or purchases 
of units in trusts) should not be included in the main section of the form, but should be noted 
in Part B.  Property held for the ADI’s own use should not be included. 
Bank ADIs need only include commercial property exposures which exceed AUD $250 000, 
whilst non-bank ADIs should include total exposures irrespective of the dollar amount.  
Part B – ADIs own investment in commercial property 
An ADI’s own investment in commercial property (such as equity investments or purchases 
of units in trusts) should be included in this section of the form.  Property held for the ADI’s 
own use should not be included. 
Authorised Version F2022L00227 registered 01/03/2022
March 2022 
 
 
ARF 230.0 Instructions - 7 
Report the total current carrying value of investments in commercial property (such as equity 
investments and purchases of units in trusts), that exceed AUD $250 000 for bank ADIs, or 
the total for non-bank ADIs.  Do not include property held for the ADI’s own use. 
Investments in Australia and overseas should be reported separately. 
Report the value of all commercial property exposures written off against provisions, asset 
revaluation reserves or profits during the reporting period. Write-offs in Australia and 
overseas are required to be reported separately. 
Authorised Version F2022L00227 registered 01/03/2022


--- End of file: ARS 230 Commercial Property.txt ---

 
 
 
Financial Sector (Collection of Data) (reporting 
standard) determination No. 26 of 2019  
Reporting Standard ARS 322.0 Statement of Financial Position 
(Consolidated)  
Financial Sector (Collection of Data) Act 2001 
 
I, Alison Bliss, delegate of APRA, under paragraph 13(1)(a) of the Financial Sector 
(Collection of Data) Act 2001 (the Act) and subsection 33(3) of the Acts Interpretation Act 
1901: 
  
(a) REVOKE Financial Sector (Collection of Data) (reporting standard) determination No. 
22 of 2018, including Reporting Standard ARS 322.0 Statement of Financial Position 
(Consolidated) made under that Determination; and 
  
(b) DETERMINE Reporting Standard ARS 322.0 Statement of Financial Position 
(Consolidated), in the form set out in the Schedule, which applies to the financial sector 
entities to the extent provided in paragraph 3 of the reporting standard.  
 
Under section 15 of the Act, I DECLARE that the reporting standard shall begin to apply to 
those financial sector entities, and the revoked reporting standard shall cease to apply, on 1 
July 2019.  
 
This instrument commences on 1 July 2019. 
 
Dated: 13 June 2019 
 
 
[Signed] 
 
Alison Bliss 
General Manager 
Data Analytics & Insights Division 
 
 
 
 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
 
 
 
Interpretation 
In this Determination: 
APRA means the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority. 
financial sector entity has the meaning given by section 5 of the Act.  
 
 
Schedule  
 
Reporting Standard ARS 322.0 Statement of Financial Position (Consolidated) comprises the 
document commencing on the following page. 
 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
 
July 2019 
 
ARS 322.0 - 1 
 
Reporting Standard ARS 322.0 
Statement of Financial Position (Consolidated)   
Objective of this Reporting Standard 
This Reporting Standard sets out requirements for the provision of information to 
APRA relating to an authorised deposit-taking institution’s statement of financial 
position. 
It includes Reporting Form ARF 322.0 Statement of Financial Position 
(Consolidated) and the associated specific instructions.   
 
Authority 
1. 
This Reporting Standard is made under section 13 of the Financial Sector (Collection 
of Data) Act 2001.  
Purpose 
2. 
Information collected by Reporting Form ARF 322.0 Statement of Financial Position 
(Consolidated) (ARF 322.0) is used by APRA for the purpose of prudential 
supervision. It may also be used by the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) and the 
Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS). 
Application and commencement 
3. 
This Reporting Standard applies to an authorised deposit-taking institution (ADI) that is 
a highest parent entity in relation to a consolidated ADI group. This Reporting Standard 
does not apply to a branch of a foreign bank. 
4. 
This Reporting Standard commences on 1 July 2019. 
Information required 
5. 
An ADI to which this Reporting Standard applies must provide APRA with the 
information required by ARF 322.0 for each reporting period. 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
 
July 2019 
 
ARS 322.0 - 2 
Method of submission 
6. 
The information required by this Reporting Standard must be given to APRA in 
electronic format, using the ‘Direct to APRA’ application or by a method (i.e. a web-
based solution) notified by APRA, in writing, prior to submission. 
Note: the Direct to APRA application software (also known as D2A) may be obtained from APRA. 
Reporting periods and due dates 
7. 
Subject to paragraph 9, the information required by this Reporting Standard must be 
provided in respect of each quarter based on the financial year (within the meaning of 
the Corporations Act 2001) of the ADI. 
8. 
The information required by this Reporting Standard must be provided to APRA within 
28 calendar days after the end of the reporting period to which the information relates.  
9. 
APRA may, by notice in writing, change the reporting periods, or specified reporting 
periods, for a particular ADI, to require it to provide the information required by this 
Reporting Standard more frequently, or less frequently, having regard to: 
(a) 
the particular circumstances of the ADI; 
(b) 
the extent to which the information is required for the purposes of prudential 
supervision of the ADI; and 
(c) 
the requirements of the RBA and the ABS. 
10. 
APRA may grant an ADI an extension of a due date in writing, in which case the new 
due date for the provision of the information will be the date on the notice of extension.  
Note: For the avoidance of doubt, if the due date for a particular reporting period falls on a day other than 
a usual business day, an ADI is nonetheless required to submit the information required no later than the 
due date. 
Quality control 
11. 
All information provided by an ADI under this Reporting Standard must be the product 
of systems, processes and controls that have been reviewed and tested by the external 
auditor of the ADI as set out in Prudential Standard APS 310 Audit and Related 
Matters. Relevant standards and guidance statements issued by the Auditing and 
Assurance Standards Board provide information on the scope and nature of the review 
and testing required from external auditors. This review and testing must be done on an 
annual basis or more frequently if necessary to enable the external auditor to form an 
opinion on the accuracy and reliability of the information provided by an ADI under 
this Reporting Standard.  
12. 
All information provided by an ADI under this Reporting Standard must be subject to 
systems, processes and controls developed by the ADI for the internal review and 
authorisation of that information. These systems, processes and controls are to assure 
the completeness and reliability of the information provided. 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
 
July 2019 
 
ARS 322.0 - 3 
Authorisation 
13. 
When an officer or agent of an ADI submits information under this Reporting Standard 
using the D2A application, or other method notified by APRA, it will be necessary for 
the officer or agent to digitally sign the relevant information using a digital certificate 
or other digital identity credential acceptable to APRA. 
Minor alterations to forms and instructions 
14. 
APRA may make minor variations to:  
(a) 
a form that is part of this Reporting Standard, and the instructions to such a form, 
to correct technical, programming or logical errors, inconsistencies or anomalies; 
or 
(b) 
the instructions to a form, to clarify their application to the form 
without changing any substantive requirement in the form or instructions. 
15. 
If APRA makes such a variation, it must notify in writing each ADI that is required to 
report under this Reporting Standard. 
Transition 
16. 
An ADI must report under the old Reporting Standard in respect of a transitional 
reporting period. For these purposes: 
old Reporting Standard means the Reporting Standard revoked by the determination 
that makes this Reporting Standard (being the Reporting Standard that this Reporting 
Standard replaces), as in force immediately before the commencement of this Reporting 
Standard. 
transitional reporting period means a reporting period under the old Reporting 
Standard: 
(a) 
that ended on or before 31 December 2018; and 
(b) 
in relation to which the ADI was required, under the old Reporting Standard, to 
report by a date on or after the date of revocation of the old Reporting Standard. 
Note: For the avoidance of doubt, if an ADI was required to report under an old Reporting Standard, and 
the reporting documents were due before the date of revocation of the old Reporting Standard, the ADI is 
still required to provide any overdue reporting documents in accordance with the old Reporting Standard. 
Interpretation 
17. 
In this Reporting Standard: 
AASB has the meaning in section 9 of the Corporations Act 2001. 
AASB 127 means Australian accounting standard AASB 127 Separate Financial 
Statements made by the Australian Accounting Standards Board. 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
 
July 2019 
 
ARS 322.0 - 4 
ADI means an authorised deposit-taking institution within the meaning of the Banking 
Act 1959. 
APRA means the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority established under the 
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority Act 1998. 
branch of a foreign bank means a ‘foreign ADI’ as defined in section 5 of the Banking 
Act 1959. 
building society means a locally incorporated ADI that assumes or uses the expression 
‘building society’ in relation to its banking business.  
consolidated ADI group means a group comprising:  
(a) 
an ADI that is a highest parent entity; and  
(b) 
each subsidiary under the control (within the meaning of AASB 127) of that ADI, 
whether the subsidiary is locally-incorporated or not. 
credit union means a locally incorporated ADI that assumes or uses the expression 
‘credit union’ in relation to its banking business and includes Cairns Penny Savings & 
Loans Limited. 
due date means the relevant due date under paragraph 8 or, if applicable, the date on a 
notice of extension given under paragraph 10. 
foreign ADI has the meaning in section 5 of the Banking Act 1959. 
highest parent entity means an ADI that satisfies all of the following conditions:  
(a) 
it is locally-incorporated;  
(b) 
it has at least one subsidiary under its control (within the meaning of AASB 127); 
and  
(c) 
it is not itself a subsidiary (within the meaning of AASB 127) of an ADI that is 
locally-incorporated. 
locally incorporated means incorporated in Australia or in a State or Territory of 
Australia, by or under a Commonwealth, State or territory law. 
reporting period means a period mentioned in paragraph 7 or, if applicable, the date on 
a notice given under paragraph 9. 
stake means a stake determined under the Financial Sector (Shareholdings) Act 1998, 
as if the only associates that were taken into account under paragraph (b) of subclause 
10(1) of the Schedule to that Act were those set out in paragraphs (h), (j) and (l) of 
subclause 4(1). 
18. 
Unless the contrary intention appears, any reference to an Act, Prudential Standard, 
Reporting Standard, Australian Accounting or Auditing Standard is a reference to the 
instrument as in force or existing from time to time. 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
 
July 2019 
 
ARS 322.0 - 5 
19. 
Where this Reporting Standard provides for APRA to exercise a power or discretion, 
this power or discretion is to be exercised in writing.  
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 - 1 
 
ARF_322_0: Statement of Financial Position (C) 
 
Australian Business Number 
Institution Name 
 
 
Reporting Period 
Scale Factor  
Quarterly 
Whole dollars no decimal place  
Reporting Consolidation 
 
Group Book 
 
 
Section A: Assets 
 
1. Cash and Liquid Assets 
 
1.1. Notes and coins 
 
1.2. Deposits at call 
 
1.3. Gold bullion 
 
1.4. Due from clearing houses 
 
1.5. Securities purchased under agreements to resell 
 
1.6. Due from financial institutions 
 
1.7. Total cash and liquid assets 
 
 
 
2. Securities held for trading 
 
2.1.  Australian Commonwealth government securities 
 
2.2. Other Australian government securities 
 
2.3. Foreign government securities 
 
2.4. ADI debt securities 
 
2.5. Corporate debt paper 
 
2.6. Asset backed debt securities 
 
2.7. Other debt securities 
 
2.8. Equity securities 
 
2.9. Total securities held for trading 
 
 
 
3. Securities not held for trading 
 
3.1. Australian Commonwealth government securities 
 
3.2. Other Australian government securities 
 
3.3. Foreign government securities 
 
3.4. ADI debt securities 
 
3.5. Corporate debt paper 
 
3.6. Asset backed debt securities 
 
3.7. Other debt securities 
 
3.8. ADI equity securities 
 
3.9. Insurance corporations equity securities 
 
3.10. Other equity securities 
 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 - 2 
3.11. Total securities not held for trading 
 
 
 
4. Other Deposits 
 
4.1. ADIs 
 
4.2. Other 
 
4.3. Total other deposits 
 
 
 
5. Net Acceptances of Customers 
 
 
 
6. Loans and Advances 
 
 
Balance 
Outstanding 
Specific 
Provision 
General 
Reserve for 
Credit 
Losses 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
6.1. Revolving credit facilities 
 
 
 
6.2. Credit cards 
 
 
 
6.3. Housing - variable rate 
 
 
 
6.4. Housing - fixed rate 
 
 
 
6.5. Term loans - variable rate 
 
 
 
6.6. Term loans - fixed rate 
 
 
 
6.7. Lease financing 
 
 
 
6.8. Other loans and advances 
 
 
 
6.9. Total loans and advances 
 
 
 
6.10. Less: Deferred fee income 
 
 
 
6.11. Total net loans and advances (net of specific provision, 
general reserve for credit losses and deferred fee income) 
 
 
6.11.1. of which: Loans to associates/joint ventures 
 
6.11.2. of which: Loans held at fair value 
 
 
 
7. Investments relating to Life Insurance Business 
 
7.1. Total investments relating to life insurance business 
 
7.1.1. of which: Excess of net market values of the investment in 
life insurance subsidiaries over recognised net assets of 
subsidiary 
 
 
 
8. Other Investments 
 
8.1. Investment in parent entity (where not part of consolidated 
group) 
 
8.2. Investment in associates 
 
8.3. Interest in joint ventures 
 
8.4. Equity investments in former SSPs 
 
8.5. Other 
 
8.6. Total other investments 
 
 
 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 - 3 
9. Fixed Assets 
 
9.1. Property 
 
9.2. Plant and equipment 
 
9.3. Less:  Accumulated depreciation/impairment- Property, plant 
and equipment 
 
9.4. Property, plant and equipment net of accumulated 
depreciation/impairment 
 
9.5. Information technology 
 
9.5.1. Work in progress (WIP) 
 
9.5.1.1. Hardware and software application costs 
 
9.5.1.2. Development and other on costs 
 
9.5.1.3. Total WIP 
 
9.5.2. In use 
 
9.5.2.1. Hardware and software application costs 
 
9.5.2.2. Development and other on costs 
 
9.5.2.3. Total in use 
 
9.5.3. Other information technology 
 
9.5.4. Total information technology (WIP plus In use plus Other 
information technology) 
 
9.6. Less:  Accumulated depreciation/impairment - Information 
technology 
 
9.7. Total information technology net of accumulated 
depreciation/impairment 
 
9.8. Other 
 
9.9. Less:  Accumulated depreciation 
 
9.10. Total other net of accumulated depreciation/impairment 
 
9.11. Net fixed assets 
 
 
 
10. Intangible Assets 
 
10.1. Intangible assets with a finite life 
 
10.2. Less:  Accumulated amortisation 
 
10.3. Net Intangible assets with a finite life 
 
10.4. Intangible assets with an infinite life 
 
10.5. Less:  Impairment 
 
10.6. Net intangible assets with an infinite life 
 
10.7. Goodwill 
 
10.8. Less:  Impairment 
 
10.9. Net goodwill 
 
10.10. Net intangible assets 
 
 
 
11. Other Assets 
 
11.1. Interest receivable 
 
11.2. General insurance premiums and other receivables 
 
11.3. Deferred acquisition costs - general insurance policies 
 
11.4. Capitalised debt raising/funding costs 
 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 - 4 
11.5. Capitalised costs associated with establishing/setting up 
securitisation vehicles/programs 
 
11.6. Capitalised loan and lease origination fees and commissions 
paid to mortgage originators and brokers 
 
11.7. Other capitalised expenses of a general nature 
 
11.8. Derivative financial instruments 
 
11.8.1. Trading book derivatives 
 
11.8.2. Banking book derivatives 
 
11.9. Amounts receivable from clients - outstanding security 
settlements 
 
11.10. Deferred tax assets 
 
11.10.1. From tax losses 
 
11.10.2. From specific provision and general reserve for credit 
losses 
 
11.10.3. Other 
 
11.11. Loan/credit card servicing rights 
 
11.12. Defined benefit assets 
 
11.13. Non-current assets and disposal groups classified as held for 
sale 
 
11.14. Items in suspense 
 
11.15. Other 
 
11.16. Total other assets 
 
 
 
12. Total  Assets 
 
12.1.  of which: Due from associated entities/joint ventures 
 
 
Section B: Liabilities 
 
1. Due to Clearing Houses 
 
 
 
2. Due to Financial Institutions 
 
2.1. Total due to financial institutions 
 
 
 
3. Acceptances 
 
 
 
4. Deposits 
 
4.1. Call/on demand 
 
4.2. Term deposits 
 
4.3. Certificates of deposit 
 
4.4. Other 
 
4.5. Total deposits 
 
 
 
5. Other Borrowings 
 
5.1. Securities sold under agreements to repurchase 
 
5.2. Promissory notes/commercial paper 
 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 - 5 
5.3. Short-term loans 
 
5.3.1. Variable 
 
5.3.2. Fixed 
 
5.4. Total other borrowings 
 
 
 
6. Income Tax Liability 
 
6.1. Current tax liability 
 
6.2. Deferred tax liability 
 
6.3. Total income tax liability 
 
 
 
7. Provisions 
 
7.1. Dividends  
 
7.2. Employee entitlements 
 
7.3. Non-lending losses 
 
7.4. Mortgage insurance claims and unearned premiums  
 
7.5. Restructuring costs 
 
7.6. Other provisions 
 
7.7. Total provisions 
 
 
 
8. General Insurance Outstanding Claims and Unearned Premium 
Liability 
 
 
 
9. Life Insurance Policy Liabilities 
 
 
 
10. Unvested Policy Holder Benefits 
 
 
 
11. Bonds, Notes and Long-term Borrowings 
 
11.1. Debt securities 
 
11.2. Loans 
 
11.2.1. Variable rate 
 
11.2.2. Fixed rate 
 
11.3. Total bonds, notes and long-term borrowings 
 
 
 
12. Creditors and Other Liabilities 
 
12.1. Defined benefit liability - current  
 
12.2. Defined benefit liability - non current  
 
12.3. Interest payable 
 
12.4. Unearned interest 
 
12.5. Amounts payable to clients - outstanding security settlements 
 
12.6. Derivative financial instruments 
 
12.6.1. Trading book derivatives 
 
12.6.2. Banking book derivatives 
 
12.7. Items in suspense 
 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 - 6 
12.8. Due to merchants 
 
12.9. Liabilities included in disposal groups classified as held for sale 
 
12.10. Share capital repayable on demand 
 
12.11. Other 
 
12.12. Total creditors and other liabilities 
 
 
 
13. Loan Capital and Hybrid Securities 
 
13.1. Members withdrawable shares 
 
13.2. Loan capital 
 
13.3. Hybrid securities 
 
13.4. Total loan capital and hybrid securities 
 
 
 
14. Total Liabilities 
 
14.1. of which: Due to associated entities/joint ventures 
 
 
 
15. Net Assets 
 
 
Section C: Shareholders' Equity 
 
1. Share Capital 
 
1.1. Ordinary shares 
 
1.2. Preference shares 
 
1.3. Other 
 
1.4. Total share capital 
 
 
 
2. Reserves 
 
2.1. General reserve 
 
2.2. Capital profits reserve 
 
2.3. Asset revaluation reserve 
 
2.3.1. Owner-occupied property 
 
2.3.2. Plant and equipment 
 
2.3.3. Investment in associates/share of associates 
 
2.3.4. Intangibles revaluation surplus 
 
2.3.5. Relating to non-current assets or disposal groups held for 
sale 
 
2.3.6. Other 
 
2.3.7. Total asset revaluation reserve 
 
2.4. Foreign currency translation reserve 
 
2.5. Fair value through OCI Reserve 
 
2.5.1. Marketable securities 
 
2.5.2. Other 
 
2.6. Cash flow hedge reserve 
 
2.7. Share based payments reserve 
 
2.8. Other reserves 
 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 - 7 
2.9. Total reserves 
 
 
 
3. Retained Profits 
 
 
 
4. Shareholders' Equity attributable to Shareholders of the 
Company 
 
 
 
5. Minority Interests 
 
 
 
6. Total Shareholders' Equity 
 
 
 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 1 
Reporting Form ARF 322.0 
Statement of Financial Position (Consolidated) 
Instruction Guide 
General directions and notes 
Other definitions 
In these Instructions:  
Personal: individuals, or groups of individuals whose dealings with other sectors are for 
personal (i.e. non-business) purposes. 
Commercial: transactions conducted with Private trading companies, Public trading 
enterprises, Private unincorporated businesses, and Community service organisations, for use 
in connection with businesses carried on by them. 
‘Parent entity’, ‘controlled entity’ (subsidiary), ‘associated entity’: these terms are defined 
in accordance with AASB 127, AASB 3 and AASB 128 Investments in Associates and Joint 
Ventures (AASB 128). 
‘Related parties’: related parties of the reporting entity include the parent entity, controlled 
entities, associated entities, joint venture entities and other branches under the same parent 
entity. 
Reporting entity 
This is to be completed by all authorised deposit-taking institutions (ADIs) on a consolidated 
group basis (where applicable). 
The basis of consolidation required in this form is in accordance with the accounting 
consolidated group. The accounting consolidated group is to be determined in accordance 
with the requirements of the Australian accounting standards, notably AASB 127 Separate 
Financial Statements (AASB 127) and AASB 3 Business Combinations (AASB 3). 
ADIs that do not have any controlled entities are not required to submit forms for this 
reporting entity. 
Branches of foreign banks are not required to complete this form. 
Consolidated ADI group 
This refers to the global operations of the ADI and all its controlled entities (where relevant), 
consolidated in accordance with Australian accounting standards (AASB 127 and AASB 3).  
The terms ‘controlled entity’ and ‘parent entity’ are defined in accordance with AASB 127 
and AASB 3. 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 2 
Exclude from the accounting consolidated group special purpose vehicles (SPVs) whose 
assets have satisfied the clean sale requirements set out in Prudential Standard APS 120 
Securitisation (APS 120) (refer to Securitisation Deconsolidation Principle below). 
Securitisation deconsolidation principle  
1. 
Where an ADI (or a member of its Level 2 consolidated group) participates in a 
securitisation that meets APRA’s operational requirements for regulatory capital relief 
under Prudential Standard APS 120 Securitisation (APS 120): 
(a) 
special purpose vehicles (SPVs) holding securitised assets may be treated as non-
consolidated independent third parties for regulatory reporting purposes, 
irrespective of whether the SPVs (or their assets) are consolidated for accounting 
purposes; and 
(b) 
the assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses of the relevant SPVs may be 
excluded from the ADI’s reported amounts in APRA’s regulatory reporting 
returns. 
2. 
Where an ADI (or a member of its Level 2 consolidated group) participates in a 
securitisation that does not meet APRA’s operational requirements for regulatory 
capital relief under APS 120, or the ADI undertakes a funding-only securitisation or 
synthetic securitisation, such assets are to be reported as on-balance sheet in APRA’s 
regulatory reporting returns. 
Reporting period and timeframe for lodgement 
The form is to be completed as at the last day of each quarter based on the financial year 
(within the meaning of the Corporations Act 2001) of the ADI. ADIs must submit the 
completed form to APRA within 28 calendar days after the end of the relevant reporting 
quarter or by the date specified in a notice of extension granted by APRA.  
Unit of measurement 
ADIs are asked to complete the form in whole Australian dollars (no decimal place). 
Amounts denominated in foreign currency are to be converted to AUD in accordance with 
AASB 121 The Effects of Changes in Foreign Exchange Rates (AASB 121). 
The general requirements of AASB 121 for translation are: 
1. 
foreign currency monetary items outstanding at the reporting date must be translated at 
the spot rate at the reporting date;1 
2. 
foreign currency non-monetary items that are measured at historical cost in a foreign 
currency must be translated using the exchange rate at the date of the transaction;2 
                                                 
1  
Monetary items are defined to mean units of currency held and assets and liabilities to be received or 
paid in a fixed or determinable number of units of currency. Spot rate means the exchange rate for 
immediate delivery. 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 3 
3. 
foreign currency non-monetary items that are measured at fair value will be translated 
at the exchange rate at the date when fair value was determined.  
Transactions arising under foreign currency derivative contracts at the reporting date must be 
prepared in accordance with AASB 9 Financial Instruments (AASB 9), AASB 7 Financial 
Instruments: Disclosures (AASB 7) and AASB 132 Financial Instruments: Presentation. 
However, those foreign currency derivatives that are not within the scope of AASB 9 (e.g. 
some foreign currency derivatives that are embedded in other contracts) remain within the 
scope of AASB 121. 
For APRA purposes, equity items must be translated using the foreign currency exchange rate 
at the date of investment or acquisition. Post-acquisition changes in equity are required to be 
translated on the date of the movement. 
As foreign currency derivatives are measured at fair value, the currency derivative contracts 
are translated at the spot rate at the reporting date.  
Exchange differences should be recognised in profit and loss in the period which they arise. 
For foreign currency derivatives, the exchange differences would be recognised immediately 
in profit and loss if the hedging instrument is a fair value hedge. For derivatives used in a 
cash flow hedge, the exchange differences should be recognised directly in equity.  
The ineffective portion of the exchange differences in all hedges would be recognised in 
profit and loss; and 
4. 
in relation to financial reports of foreign operations: 
A foreign operation is defined in AASB 121 to mean an entity that is a subsidiary, associate, 
joint venture or branch of a reporting entity, the activities of which are based or conducted in 
a country or currency other than those of the reporting entity. 
 
Exchange differences relating to foreign currency monetary items that form part of the 
net investment of an entity in a foreign operation, must be recognised as a separate 
component of equity.  
 
Translation of financial reports should otherwise follow the requirements in AASB 121. 
Netting 
Unless otherwise specifically stated, institutions are allowed to take advantage of netting 
agreements in relation to disclosure of data items in this form. Institutions are to comply with 
the prerequisite for netting outlined in Australian accounting standards AASB 7 and AASB 
132 and any relevant prudential standards. 
                                                                                                                                                        
2  
Examples of non-monetary items include amounts prepaid for goods and services (e.g. prepaid rent); 
goodwill; intangible assets; physical assets; and provisions that are to be settled by the delivery of a non-
monetary asset. 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 4 
Term to maturity 
Any references to ‘term to maturity’ in Reporting Form ARF 322.0 Statement of Financial 
Position (Consolidated) (ARF 322.0) refer to residual term to maturity. 
Basis of preparation 
The nature of the disclosure and format of this form may not be strictly consistent with the 
annual financial statements prepared by the institution. Notwithstanding this, in completing 
this form (unless otherwise specifically stated for individual items of assets, liabilities or 
equity), institutions are requested to follow the basis that is used for the preparation of its 
annual financial statements in accordance with the Australian Accounting Standards, 
specifically in regard to the: 
 
interpretation/definition of specific asset, liability and equity items; 
 
appropriate measurement basis for asset, liability and equity items; and 
 
netting of financial assets and financial liabilities. 
Classification schema 
This information is provided as a reference guide for the disclosure of the loans and advances 
portfolios and deposit portfolios as required in ARF 322.0, it can be also be used as a general 
guide for other classifications in the form.   
In defining sectors (refer to below), the following three broad classifications are used: 
1. Private/public classification 
Private: the private sector comprises private corporations, households and non-profit 
institutions serving households; and 
Public: the public sector comprises government-controlled corporations, general government 
units and non-profit institutions controlled by government. 
2. Level of Government classification 
The level of Government classification is: 
 
National/Central; 
 
State/Territory; and 
 
Local. 
3. Resident/non-resident classification  
An Australian resident is any individual, business or other organisation domiciled in 
Australia. Australian branches and Australian subsidiaries of foreign businesses are regarded 
as Australian residents.  
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 5 
A non-resident is any individual, business or other organisation domiciled overseas. Foreign 
branches and foreign subsidiaries of Australian businesses are regarded as non-residents. 
Sector definitions  
Households 
This comprises individuals, or groups of individuals, resident in Australia whose dealings 
with other sectors are for personal or household purposes. 
Exclude: 
 
sole proprietors, partnerships, family trusts, and any other unincorporated enterprises 
owned by households. Show these as private unincorporated businesses. 
Community service organisations 
Include: 
 
institutions financed mostly by members’ contributions, e.g. trade unions, professional 
societies, consumer associations, political parties, churches and religious societies, and 
social, cultural, recreational and sports clubs; and 
 
charities and aid organisations financed by voluntary transfers. 
Exclude: 
 
community service organisations and non-profit institutions controlled and mainly 
financed by government (include in General Government). 
Non-financial corporations 
Private non-financial corporations 
Private trading corporations 
Private trading corporations are those owned and controlled by the private sector whose main 
activity is producing goods or non-financial services for sale. 
Include: 
 
all resident private corporate trading enterprises, and non-profit institutions that are 
market producers of goods or non-financial services; 
 
intra-group financiers (Financial Sector (Collection of Data) Act 2001 Category I) and 
parent companies with significant holdings of shares in private trading companies; 
 
privately owned schools and hospitals; 
 
any unincorporated unit that is a branch in Australia of a non-resident company and 
which is not included in the financial sector; and 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 6 
 
any unincorporated business owned and operated by trading corporations (e.g. joint 
ventures). 
Exclude: 
 
unincorporated businesses, except for branches of non-resident companies and joint 
ventures or partnerships owned by corporations; and 
 
non-resident enterprises. 
Private unincorporated businesses 
This comprises individuals acting as sole proprietors or in partnerships, for commercial or 
professional purposes. The major businesses to be included in this sub-sector are 
unincorporated farms, unincorporated retailers, unincorporated professional practices 
(medical, legal, dental, accounting, etc.), unincorporated businesses of tradesmen such as 
plumbers, carpenters, etc. 
Public non-financial corporations 
Commonwealth Government 
Trading enterprises owned by the Commonwealth are those businesses which are owned and 
controlled by the Australian Commonwealth Government and which produce goods or non-
financial services for sale at market prices. 
Include: 
 
All resident trading enterprises owned 50% or more by the Commonwealth 
Government or controlled by the Commonwealth Government through legislation, 
decree or regulation (e.g. Australia Post and Australian Government Solicitor). 
Exclude:  
 
government departments (show as Commonwealth General Government); and 
 
government-owned financial institutions (these are classified as financial institutions). 
State, Territory and local government 
State, Territory and local government trading enterprises are those businesses, which are 
owned and controlled by State, Territory or local governments, which produce goods or non-
financial services for sale at market prices. 
Include: 
 
All resident trading enterprises 50% or more owned by a State, Territory or local 
government or controlled by a State or Territory government, through legislation, 
decree or regulation (e.g. state rail and water authorities, gas and fuel authorities, 
housing commissions, port authorities, non-privatised power authorities). 
Exclude: 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 7 
 
State government owned financial institutions and entities in the general government; 
and 
 
State and Territory central borrowing authorities. 
General Government  
Commonwealth General Government 
Australian Commonwealth Government departments and agencies’ principal function is to 
provide non-market goods and services, principally financed by taxes, to regulate economic 
activity, maintain law and order and to redistribute income and wealth by means of transfers. 
Include: 
 
departments and agencies such as Department of Finance, Department of Defence, 
ABC, SBS, Australian Film Commission and CSIRO; 
 
Commonwealth government unincorporated enterprises which provide goods and 
services to the Australian Commonwealth Government and/or to the public for free or 
at prices that are not economically significant (e.g. government employee cafeterias, 
munitions factories); 
 
non-profit institutions controlled and mainly financed by the Commonwealth 
government; 
 
Commonwealth Government quasi-corporations which sell their output, at near market 
prices, exclusively to other government units (e.g. government printers and defence 
force housing schemes); and 
 
public universities. 
Exclude: 
 
government trading enterprises such as Australia Post (record as Trading enterprises 
owned by the Commonwealth Government); and 
 
departments of the ACT and Northern Territory Governments (record as State, 
Territory and local general government); and 
 
Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) and Commonwealth Government financial 
institutions such as Export Finance and Insurance Corporation (EFIC) (record as 
financial institutions as appropriate). 
State, Territory and local general government 
State, Territory and local general government provide non-market goods and services 
principally financed by taxes to regulate economic activity, maintain law and order and to 
redistribute income and wealth by means of transfers and hence provided free of charge or at 
nominal prices well below the cost of production. 
Include: 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 8 
 
State and local government unincorporated enterprises which provide goods and 
services to their government and/or to the public for free or at prices that are not 
economically significant (e.g. government employee cafeterias, municipal swimming 
pools); 
 
non-profit institutions controlled and mainly financed by State and local government; 
 
State government quasi-corporations which sell their output, at near market prices, 
exclusively to other government units (e.g. government printers); 
 
ACT and Northern Territory Government departments and agencies; and 
 
state schools, technical and further education colleges and state owned hospitals. 
Exclude: 
 
all State and local government trading enterprises and financial enterprises (e.g. rail, 
and municipal water authorities); and 
 
State and Territory central borrowing authorities. 
Financial corporations 
RBA 
The RBA is a public financial corporation and has responsibility for monetary policy, issuing 
banknotes, holding Australia’s international reserves and providing banking services to the 
Commonwealth. 
Other central bank institutions 
This sub-sector includes APRA.  
Depository corporations 
ADIs 
ADIs refers to corporations, in relation to which an authority under subsection 9(3) of the 
Banking Act 1959 is in force.  
Include: 
 
development banks; and  
 
foreign banks licensed to operate in Australia under the Banking Act 1959. 
Exclude: 
 
merchant banks (record as non-bank financial intermediaries); and 
 
non-resident banks (report as non-resident counterparties). 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 9 
Registered Financial Corporations (RFCs) 
RFCs refers to corporations registered under the Financial Sector (Collection of Data) Act 
2001 that are classified as Categories D and Other and cash management trusts. 
Include:  
 
money market corporations (also referred to as ‘merchant banks’) (D); 
 
pastoral finance companies, finance companies and general financiers (other); and 
 
cash management trusts. 
A list of corporations registered under the Financial Sector (Collection of Data) Act 2001 and 
their classification are available on request. 
Exclude: 
 
intra group financiers registered under the Financial Sector (Collection of Data) Act 
2001 Category I (record as private trading corporations). 
Life insurance 
Life insurance companies must be registered with APRA.  They offer insurance for death or 
disability and also offer investment and superannuation products. 
Include: 
 
benefit fund friendly societies that are regulated under the Life Insurance Act 1995. 
Exclude: 
 
insurance companies offering house, car and marine insurance (these are general 
insurance companies); and 
 
health benefit funds of friendly societies that are regulated under the National Health 
Act 1959. 
Pension funds 
The pension funds sub-sector includes all superannuation funds that are regarded as 
complying funds for the purposes of the Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993 and 
other autonomous funds established for the benefit of public sector employees. 
Superannuation funds with all of their assets invested with insurance offices are included. 
Superannuation funds and Approved Deposit Funds (ADFs) are established to provide 
benefits for their members on retirement, resignation, death or disablement. Superannuation 
funds and ADFs usually take the legal form of trust funds. 
Include: 
 
Pooled Superannuation Trusts; 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 10 
 
public sector superannuation funds (including SIS-exempt funds); 
 
private sector superannuation funds; 
 
ADFs; and 
 
superannuation funds established by life insurance companies. 
Exclude: 
 
retirement savings accounts. 
Other insurance corporations 
The other insurance corporations sub-sector includes all corporations that provide insurance 
other than life insurance. Included are general, fire, accident, employer liability, household 
and consumer credit insurers and health insurance funds. These companies must be registered 
with APRA. They mainly offer house, car and marine insurance. 
Include:  
 
EFIC; and 
 
private sector and government-owned general and health insurance enterprises, both 
proprietary and mutual. 
Central borrowing authorities (CBAs) 
These are corporations established by State and Territory governments to provide finance for 
government authorities and to manage their surplus funds. 
Include:  
 
New South Wales Treasury Corporation (NSW TCorp); 
 
Treasury Corporation of Victoria (TCV); 
 
Queensland Treasury Corporation (QTC); 
 
South Australian Government Financing Authority (SAFA); 
 
Western Australian Treasury Corporation (WATC); 
 
Tasmanian Public Finance Corporation (Tas Corp); 
 
Northern Territory Treasury Corporation (NT TCorp); and 
 
ACT Treasury 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 11 
Other financial institutions 
Financial auxiliaries 
These are corporations and quasi-corporations engaged primarily in activities closely related 
to financial intermediation, but which do not themselves perform an intermediation role. 
Include: 
 
fund managers as principal; 
 
stockbrokers; and 
 
insurance brokers. 
Exclude: 
 
non-resident enterprises. 
Financial intermediaries 
Securitisers 
These are financial vehicles that issue short and/or long-term securities (called asset-backed 
securities) using specifically selected assets (e.g. mortgages, receivables). They provide 
backing (collateral) for the securities and generate the payment streams necessary to fulfil 
interest and principal requirements for investors. 
Unit trusts 
Include: 
 
mortgage, fixed interest and equity unit trusts. 
Exclude: 
 
cash management trusts. These are to be included in RFCs; 
 
property and trading trusts, include in private trading corporations; and 
 
non-resident enterprises. 
Other financial intermediaries 
Comprise all financial intermediaries other than central bank institutions, depository 
corporations, insurance corporations, pension funds, CBAs, securitisers and unit trusts.  
Include: 
 
economic development corporations owned by governments; 
 
co-operative housing societies; 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 12 
 
investment companies; and 
 
common funds including cash common funds. 
Exclude: 
 
non-resident enterprises. 
Rest of the world/non-residents 
The rest of the world sector consists of all non-resident units that enter into transactions, or 
have other economic links, with Australian resident units. The concept of residence is one 
based on the economic territory of a country rather than legal or political concepts. A non-
resident unit is any individual, enterprise or other organisation ordinarily domiciled in a 
country other than Australia. 
Include:  
 
foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of Australian enterprises; and 
 
residents of Norfolk Island and other external territories of Australia. 
Exclude: 
 
Australian branches or subsidiaries of an overseas company. 
 
 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 13 
Specific instructions 
Section A: Assets 
1. Cash and liquid assets 
Generally include: 
 
Australian notes and coin; 
 
foreign currency; 
 
cash at branches; 
 
cash at bankers; 
 
deposits at call; 
 
money at short call; 
 
exchange settlement accounts; 
 
securities purchased under agreement to resell; 
 
margin deposit accounts; and 
 
gold bullion. 
Exclude: 
 
bills of exchange (reported as either Securities held for trading or Securities not held for 
trading); 
 
bills receivable and remittances in transit; and 
 
cheques received but not yet deposited. 
This reporting item should be brought to account at the face value or the gross value of the 
outstanding balance where appropriate. Interest is taken to profit and loss when earned. 
1.1 Notes and coins 
Include Australian and foreign currency notes and coins of the reporting entity. Notes and 
coins in transit between any branches or offices of the reporting entity should be reported.  
1.2 Deposits at call: 
Include: 
 
all deposits with Australian resident ADIs that are available on demand. Report 11am 
accounts and 24-hour money. 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 14 
 
all deposits with RFCs that are available on demand. Report 11am accounts and 24-
hour money. 
 
all deposits with other financial institutions resident in Australia that are available on 
demand. Report 11am accounts and 24-hour money.  
Exclude: 
 
exchange settlement accounts.  
1.3 Gold bullion 
Include: 
 
gold coin; 
 
gold bullion held in Australia and elsewhere; and 
 
gold certificates held as investments. 
Exclude: 
 
loans repayable in gold bullion. 
1.4 Due from clearing houses 
Include: 
 
net claims on recognised clearing houses in Australia such as the Australian Stock 
Exchange Clearing House (ASXCH) and Sydney Futures Exchange Clearing House 
(SFXCH). 
1.5 Securities purchased under agreements to resell 
Treatment is to be consistent with AASB 9.  
Where the transferee of the stock effectively receives a lender’s rate of return (i.e. the 
underlying risks and rewards of ownership of the underlying stock is not effectively 
transferred), these transactions are to be accounted for as collateralised borrowing activities 
(treating stock borrowing as on balance sheet exposures). Securities purchased under 
agreements to resell, represents the receivable due from counterparties from whom the stock 
has been borrowed and with whom cash has been lodged.  Under this method of accounting 
the bank’s physical stock positions recorded on the balance sheet in either securities held for 
trading or securities not held for trading sections is not affected.  
1.6 Due from financial institutions 
Generally include: 
 
settlement account balances – Austraclear and the Reserve Bank Information and 
Transfer System (RITS) balances with Australian ADIs and non-bank financial 
institutions; 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 15 
 
amounts owing from Australian ADIs and other financial institutions in relation to the 
payments system; 
 
items in the course of collection from Australian ADIs and other financial institutions 
in relation to the payments system; and 
 
margin deposit accounts with brokers. 
Exclude: 
 
certificates of deposits. These items should be reported as short-term debt securities in 
either the Securities held for trading or Securities not held for trading category. 
This reporting item should be brought to account at the gross value of the outstanding 
balance. Interest is taken to profit and loss when earned. 
1.7 Total cash and liquid assets 
Sum all cash and liquid assets reporting items above, due from residents. 
2. Securities held for Trading 
Securities held for trading are defined in accordance with AASB 9. 
Securities held for trading are recorded at net fair value, which is defined in accordance with 
AASB 9. 
Interest earned on securities held for trading is reported as interest income in the ADI 
Statement of Financial Performance. ARF 330.1 Interest Income and Interest Expense (ARF 
330.1). Dividends received are viewed as dividend income and accordingly, are to be 
classified as other operating income in ARF 330.2 Other Operating Income (ARF 330.2). 
All gains and losses, realised and unrealised are reported in net trading income in ARF 330.2. 
Report short sold positions as a negative asset against the appropriate debt or equity security 
item. 
Include: 
 
all securities (stock) lent or sold under repurchase agreements.  The payable due to 
counterparties with whom the stock has been lent or sold and from whom cash has been 
lodged is recorded in Securities sold under agreements to repurchase. 
 
holdings of debt securities issued by related parties that are resident entities (claims on 
non-resident related parties should be reported to the appropriate memo item) 
Exclude: 
 
all securities borrowed or purchased under resale agreements. The receivable due from 
counterparties from whom the stock has been borrowed or purchased and with whom 
cash has been lodged is recorded in Securities purchased under agreements to resell. 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 16 
‘Loans and advances’ should not be affected by the reporting of ‘Securities lent or sold under 
repurchase agreements’. 
2.1 Australian Commonwealth Government securities 
Include: 
 
debt securities issued by the Australian Commonwealth government. Do not include 
securities issued by Government business enterprises.  
2.2 Other Australian Government securities 
Include: 
 
debt securities issued by Australian State and Territory governments and Australian 
State and Territory central borrowing authorities. Do not include securities issued by 
Australian State and Territory government business enterprises. 
2.3 Foreign government securities 
2.4 ADI debt securities  
Include: 
 
debt securities that have been issued by ADIs (e.g. negotiable certificates of deposits, 
transferable certificates of deposits, medium term notes, debentures, unsecured notes). 
2.5 Corporate debt paper 
Include: 
 
debt securities that have been issued by corporate entities other than ADIs.  
2.6 Asset backed debt securities 
An asset-backed security is a debt security that is secured or supported by a pool of assets. 
These forms of securities are usually issued by a SPV.  
2.7 Other debt securities 
2.8 Equity securities 
Include: 
 
all equity securities held for trading consistent with the classification and measurement 
basis used for Securities held for trading by institutions in accordance with AASB 7. 
2.9 Total securities held for trading 
Sum all ‘securities held for trading’ reporting items. 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 17 
3. Securities not held for trading 
Securities not held for trading are those securities, which do not fall within the definition of 
‘Securities held for trading’ (as defined in accordance with AASB 7). These are generally 
securities purchased with the intent that they be generally held to maturity or held for a period 
of time, though not necessarily maturity (i.e. equity securities where it is not technically 
possible to hold to maturity). 
The ADI’s strategic investment in the equity securities of entities that are deemed to be 
controlled entities, associates or joint ventures, defined in accordance with AASB 127, 
AASB 3 and AASB 128, are to be disclosed in ‘Other Investments’ in ARF 322.0. 
Securities not held for trading are to be recorded in accordance with AASB 9. 
Interest earned on securities not held for trading is reported as Interest Income in ARF 330.1. 
Dividends received on equity securities are viewed as dividend income and accordingly, are 
to be classified as Other Operating Income in ARF 330.2. 
All realised gains and losses are reported in ARF 330.2. 
Include: 
 
all securities (stock) lent or sold under repurchase agreements.  The payable due to 
counterparties with whom the stock has been lent or sold and from whom cash has been 
lodged is recorded in Securities sold under agreements to repurchase. 
 
holdings of debt securities issued by related parties that are resident entities. 
Exclude: 
 
All securities borrowed or purchased under resale agreements.  The receivable due from 
counterparties from whom the stock has been borrowed or purchased and with whom 
cash has been lodged is recorded in Securities purchased under agreements to resell. 
3.1 Australian Commonwealth Government securities 
Include: 
 
debt securities issued by the Australian Commonwealth Government. Do not include 
securities issued by government business enterprises.  
3.2 Other Australian Government securities 
Include: 
 
debt securities issued by Australian State and Territory governments and Australian 
State and Territory central borrowing authorities. Do not include securities issued by 
Australian State and Territory government business enterprises. 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 18 
3.3 Foreign government securities 
3.4 ADI debt securities  
Include: 
 
debt securities that have been issued by ADIs (e.g. negotiable certificates of deposits, 
transferable certificates of deposits, medium term notes, debentures; unsecured notes). 
3.5 Corporate debt paper 
Include: 
 
debt securities that have been issued by corporate entities other than ADIs.  
3.6 Asset backed debt securities 
An asset-backed security is a debt security that is secured or supported by a pool of assets. 
These forms of securities are usually issued by a SPV.  
3.7 Other debt securities 
Equity securities 
Include: 
 
all equity securities consistent with the classification used for Securities not held for 
trading by institutions. 
3.8 ADI equity securities 
Record the holding of equity securities issued by ADIs that are held as Securities not held for 
trading.  
Exclude: 
 
equity investments in ‘Parent Entity’ or ‘Controlled Entities’ or ‘Associates’. These 
investments are to be reported in the classification ‘Other Investments’. 
3.9 Insurance corporations equity securities 
Record the holding of equity securities issued by insurance corporations that are held as 
Securities not held for trading.  
Exclude:  
 
equity investments in ‘Parent Entity’, ‘Controlled Entities’ or ‘Associates’. These 
investments are to be reported in the classification ‘Other Investments’. 
3.10 Other equity securities 
Record the holding of equity securities issued by corporations other than ADIs and insurance 
corporations that are held in the Securities not held for trading.  
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 19 
Exclude:  
 
equity investments in ‘Parent Entity’, ‘Controlled Entities’ or ‘Associates’. These 
investments are to be reported in the classification ‘Other Investments’. 
3.11 Total securities not held for trading 
Sum all ‘Securities not held for trading’ reporting items. 
4. Other deposits 
Include: 
 
deposits that are not invested on a call or short term basis i.e. term deposits that are not 
on a call/demand basis. Disclose total deposits invested with the following counterparty 
classifications. 
4.1 ADIs 
4.2 Other 
4.3 Total other deposits 
5. Net Acceptances of Customers 
Acceptances comprise undertakings by an ADI to pay bills of exchange drawn on customers. 
These bills of exchange are not held as part of the ADI’s asset portfolio. Acceptances are 
accounted for and disclosed as a liability with a corresponding contra asset. The contra asset 
is recognised to reflect the ADI’s claim against each drawer of the bills of exchange. 
Bills of exchange that have been accepted and held in an ADI’s asset portfolio should be 
excluded from this item. Include these holdings of own acceptances under either securities 
held for trading or securities not held for trading. 
Netting is allowed in accordance with the requirements specified in the Australian accounting 
standards (i.e. only if there is a legal right to set off and there is an intention to settle on a net 
basis, or realise the assets and settle the liability simultaneously). 
Acceptances generate fee income that is taken to profit and loss when earned. 
6. Loans and advances 
Note: Loans and advances are investments of the ADI, which are deemed for this form not to 
be evidenced by the financing/issue of debt securities (e.g. bill financing). This type of 
financing/investing is to be either recorded in the Securities held for trading or Securities not 
held for trading. 
Generally include: 
 
overdrafts; 
 
secured and unsecured lending; 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 20 
 
financial lease agreements; 
 
account balances which do not qualify as deposits; 
 
credit card outstanding balances; 
 
term loans; 
 
mortgage lending; 
 
commercial loans; 
 
equity participation in leveraged leases; 
 
redeemable preference share finance; and 
 
subordinated loans. 
Exclude: 
 
bills of exchange, commercial paper and promissory notes (report as Securities held for 
trading or Securities not held for trading); 
 
bills of exchange both discounted and held notes (report as Securities held for trading 
or Securities not held for trading); 
 
bonds, debentures, medium term notes (MTNs), transferable certificates of deposit 
(TCDs), floating-rate notes (FRNs) (show as Securities held for trading or Securities 
not held for trading); 
 
FRNs (show as Securities held for trading or Securities not held for trading); 
 
account balances with financial intermediaries such as ADIs (show as deposits or due 
from other financial institutions); and 
 
receivables due from counterparties arising from the first leg of a repurchase 
agreement.  This receivable should be reported to Securities purchased under 
agreements to resell. 
Loans and advances are recognised at amortised cost, after assessing required provisions.   
Loans and advances should be recorded net of unearned revenue; this is mainly with respect 
to unearned lease receivables. 
Netting is permitted in accordance with the requirements of the Australian accounting 
standards (i.e. where there is a legal right to set off the recognised amounts and there is an 
intention to settle on a net basis, or realise the assets and settle the liability simultaneously). 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 21 
Loan loss provisioning 
Provisions assessed on an individual facility basis in accordance with the Australian 
equivalents to International Financial Reporting Standards3 (IFRS) are to be treated as 
specific provisions in the reporting forms for regulatory reporting purposes APS 220 Credit 
Quality (APS 220). Specific provisions also include that portion of provisions assessed on a 
collective basis that are not eligible for regulatory purposes to be included in General Reserve 
for Credit Losses as defined by APS 220.  
Note: Specific provisions and General Reserve for Credit Losses for products and 
counterparties where indicated in the form are to be reported only if the data is already 
recorded and allocated on that basis by the institution. Otherwise the specific provision and 
General Reserve for Credit Losses can be disclosed in aggregate. 
Do not include associated deferred tax assets (DTA) in the amounts reported for General 
Reserve for Credit Losses or specific provisions.  Include associated DTA in 'Other Assets - 
DTA - General Reserve for Credit Losses'. 
Loans and Advances 
6.1 Revolving credit – Balance Outstanding (1) 
Include: 
 
the gross value of loans of a revolving credit nature to, for a purpose other than 
housing. 
Revolving credit is a loan arrangement in which the borrowing party may repay funds on loan 
and immediately borrow it again up to an agreed limit. 
This reporting item should be reported gross of any specific provisions and General Reserve 
for Credit Losses. 
6.1 Revolving credit – Specific provision (2) 
Report the specific provisions for impairment applied to this loan item, if this is recorded or 
allocated by the institution on this basis.  
6.1 Revolving credit – General Reserve for Credit Losses (3) 
Report the General Reserve for Credit Losses for this reporting line, if this is recorded or 
allocated by the institution on this basis.  
6.2 Credit cards – Balance Outstanding (1) 
Include: 
                                                 
3 The IFRS are the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), being the standards 
set by the International Accounting Standards Board, as existing at 1 July 2019. 
 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 22 
 
the gross value of credit card liabilities. 
This reporting item should be reported gross of any specific provisions and General Reserve 
for Credit Losses. 
6.2 Credit cards – Specific provisions (2) 
Report the specific provisions for impairment applied to this loan item, if this is recorded or 
allocated by the institution on this basis.  
6.2 Credit cards – General Reserve for Credit Losses (3) 
Report the General Reserve for Credit Losses for this reporting line, if this is recorded or 
allocated by the institution on this basis.  
6.3 Housing – variable rate – Balance outstanding (1) 
Include: 
 
the value of variable rate housing loans, for the construction or purchase of dwellings 
for owner occupation; and 
 
revolving credit or redraw facilities originally approved for a purpose of predominantly 
owner-occupied housing. 
This reporting item should be reported gross of any specific provisions and General Reserve 
for Credit Losses. 
6.3 Housing – variable rate – Specific provisions (2) 
Report the specific provisions for impairment applied to this loan item. 
6.3 Housing – variable rate – General Reserve for Credit Losses (3) 
Report the General Reserve for Credit Losses applied to this loan item if already 
recorded/allocated by the institution, otherwise leave blank. 
6.4 Housing – fixed rate – Balance outstanding (1) 
Include: 
 
the value of fixed rate housing loans, for the construction or purchase of dwellings for 
non-owner occupation; and 
 
revolving credit or redraw facilities originally approved for a purpose of predominantly 
non-owner occupied housing. 
This reporting item should be reported gross of any specific provisions and General Reserve 
for Credit Losses. 
6.4 Housing – fixed rate – Specific provisions (2) 
Report the specific provisions for impairment applied to this loan item. 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 23 
6.4 Housing – fixed rate – General Reserve for Credit Losses (3) 
Report the General Reserve for Credit Losses applied to this loan item if already 
recorded/allocated by the institution, otherwise leave blank. 
6.5 Term loans – variable rate – Balance outstanding (1) 
Include: 
 
the gross value of variable rate term loans for purposes other than housing and other 
than revolving credit, credit card and lease financing. 
This reporting item should be reported gross of any specific provisions and General Reserve 
for Credit Losses.  
6.5 Term loans – variable rate – Specific provisions (2) 
Report the specific provisions for impairment applied to this loan item, if recorded or 
allocated by the institution on this basis. 
6.5 Term loans – variable rate – General Reserve for Credit Losses (3) 
Report the General Reserve for Credit Losses for this reporting line, if recorded or allocated 
by the institution on this basis. 
6.6 Term loans – fixed rate – Balance outstanding (1) 
Include: 
 
the gross value of fixed rate term loans for purposes other than housing and other than 
revolving credit, credit card and lease financing. 
This reporting item should be reported gross of any specific provisions and General Reserve 
for Credit Losses.  
6.6 Term loans – fixed rate – Specific provisions (2) 
Report the specific provisions for impairment applied to this loan item, if recorded or 
allocated by the institution on this basis. 
6.6 Term loans – fixed rate – General Reserve for Credit Losses (3) 
Report the General Reserve for Credit Losses for this reporting line, if recorded or allocated 
by the institution on this basis. 
6.7 Lease financing – Balance outstanding (1) 
Include: 
 
the gross value of lease financing. 
This reporting item should be reported net of unearned revenue and gross of specific 
provisions for impairment and General Reserve for Credit Losses. 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 24 
6.7 Lease financing - Specific provisions (2) 
Report the specific provisions for impairment applied to this loan item, if this is recorded or 
allocated by the institution on this basis. 
6.7 Lease financing – General Reserve for Credit Losses (3) 
Report the General Reserve for Credit Losses for this reporting line, if recorded or allocated 
by the institution on this basis.  
6.8 Other loans and advances – Balance outstanding (1) 
This reporting item should be reported net of unearned revenue and gross of specific 
provisions for impairment and General Reserve for Credit Losses. 
6.8 Other loans and advances - Specific provisions (2) 
Report the specific provisions for impairment applied to this loan item, if this is recorded or 
allocated by the institution on this basis. 
6.8 Other loans and advances – General Reserve for Credit Losses (3) 
Report the General Reserve for Credit Losses for this reporting line, if recorded or allocated 
by the institution on this basis.  
6.9 Total loans and advances – Balance outstanding (1) 
Sum the gross value of loans and advances.  
6.9 Total loans and advances – Specific provision (2) 
Record the specific provisions for impairment applying to all loans.  
6.9 Total loans and advances – General Reserve for Credit Losses (3) 
Record the General Reserve for Credit Losses applying to all loans.  
6.10 Less: Deferred fee income 
Deferred fee income should be reported in this line item and deducted from Total gross loans 
and advances. 
6.11 Total net loans and advances (net of specific provision, general reserve for credit 
losses and deferred fee income) 
Subtract ‘General Reserve for Credit Losses’, and ‘specific provisions’ and ‘Deferred Fee 
Income’ from ‘total gross loans and advances’. 
6.11.1 of which: Loans to associates/joint ventures 
6.11.2 of which: Loans held at fair value 
Record loans held at fair value in accordance with AASB 9. 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 25 
7. Investments relating to Life Insurance Business 
7.1 Total investments relating to life insurance business 
7.1.1 Of which: Excess of net market values of the investment in life insurance 
subsidiaries over recognised net assets of subsidiary 
8. Other investments 
8.1 Investment in parent entity (where not part of consolidated group) 
Report the total amount of equity investments in the parent entity. Defined in accordance 
with AASB 127 and AASB 3.  
8.2 Investment in associates 
Report the total amount of equity investments in associates. Defined in accordance with 
AASB 128. 
8.3 Interest in joint ventures 
Report the total amount of interests in joint ventures (entities).  
8.4 Equity investments in former Special Service Providers (SSPs) 
Report the total value of shareholdings in former SSPs and is to be completed by ADIs that 
have affiliations with SSPs. 
8.5 Other 
Report any other investments not included above. 
8.6 Total other investments 
Sum all reporting line items for ‘Other Investments’. 
9. Fixed assets 
The reporting of all fixed asset items should be in accordance with applicable Australian 
accounting standards. Do not include property acquired or held available for sale. These 
assets are to be disclosed in ‘Other Assets’ category under line item ‘Non-current assets and 
disposal groups classified as held for sale’. 
9.1 Property 
Include: 
 
property (owner-occupied and investment) consistent with the classification and 
measurement basis used in AASB 116 Property, Plant and Equipment (AASB 116) and 
AASB 140 Investment Property (AASB 140). 
9.2 Plant and equipment 
Include: 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 26 
 
furniture, equipment (excluding ‘Information technology’), re-modelling costs to 
existing premises, and interest capitalised during the period of construction of buildings 
in accordance with AASB 116. 
9.3 Less: Accumulated depreciation/impairment - Property, plant and equipment 
Report total depreciation and impairment for all property, plant and equipment items. 
9.4 Property, plant and equipment net of accumulated depreciation /impairment 
Deduct ‘Accumulated depreciation/impairment’ from the gross values for ‘Property’ and 
‘Plant and equipment’. 
9.5 Information technology 
Where information technology is treated as an intangible asset for accounting purposes, it 
must be reported as an intangible asset in this regulatory form.  
9.5.1 Work in progress (WIP): 
9.5.1.1 Hardware and software application costs 
Include: 
 
the cost of hardware and software purchased from third parties not yet in use i.e. 
material costs. 
9.5.1.2 Development and other on costs  
Include: 
 
software development, hardware installation costs and associated overheads that are 
carried out internally not yet in use i.e. labour and overhead costs. 
9.5.1.3 Total WIP 
Sum of line items hardware and software application costs and development and other on 
costs. 
9.5.2 In use: 
9.5.2.1 Hardware and software application costs   
Include: 
 
the cost of hardware and software purchased from third parties in use i.e. material costs. 
9.5.2.2 Development and other on costs  
Include: 
 
software development, hardware installation costs and associated overheads that are 
carried out internally which are in use i.e. labour and overhead costs. 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 27 
9.5.2.3 Total in use 
Sum of line items hardware and software application costs and Development and other on 
costs. 
9.5.3 Other information technology   
Report other information technology expenditure which is not separately reported above. 
9.5.4 Total information technology  
Report total gross value of Information technology WIP and in use here. 
9.6 Less: Accumulated depreciation/impairment - Information technology 
Report accumulated depreciation/impairment in total for all Information technology assets. 
9.7 Total information technology net of accumulated depreciation/impairment 
Subtract ‘Accumulated depreciation/impairment - Information technology’ from ‘Total 
information technology (WIP plus In Use plus Other information technology)’. 
9.8 Other 
Report other fixed asset items not specifically mentioned above; e.g. leasehold improvements 
and capital leases. 
9.9 Less: Accumulated depreciation 
Report accumulated depreciation/impairment relating to other fixed assets. 
9.10 Total other net of accumulated depreciation/impairment 
Subtract ‘Less: Accumulated depreciation’ from ‘Other’. 
9.11 Net fixed assets 
Deduct accumulated depreciation/impairment from the gross values for property, plant and 
equipment, information technology and other. 
10. Intangible assets 
Intangible assets have been divided into ‘intangible assets with a finite life’ and ‘intangible 
assets with an infinite life’ and ‘goodwill’.  
Classification of assets as intangible assets must be in compliance with the Australian 
Accounting Standards. As a guide, ADIs are suggested to follow the disclosure adopted in its 
annual financial report. 
10.1 Intangible assets with a finite life 
Include: 
 
total intangible assets with a finite life. 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 28 
10.2 Less: Accumulated amortisation 
Include: 
 
the total amount of amortisation of intangible assets, over the period from the date of 
acquisition to the end of the reporting period. 
10.3 Net intangible assets with a finite life 
Subtract the ‘accumulated amortisation’ from the ‘intangible assets with a finite life’. 
10.4 Intangible assets with an infinite life  
Include: 
 
total intangible assets with an infinite life. 
10.5 Less: Impairment 
Include: 
 
the total amount of impairment of intangible assets over the period from the date of 
acquisition to the end of the reporting period. 
10.6 Net intangible assets with an infinite life 
Subtract the ‘Impairment’ from the ‘Intangible assets with an infinite life’. 
10.7 Goodwill 
Goodwill (determined in accordance with AASB 3) represents the excess of the cost of the 
business combination over the acquirer’s interest in the net fair value of the identifiable 
assets, liabilities and contingent liabilities.  
10.8 Less: Impairment 
Include: 
 
the total amount of impairment over the period from the date of acquisition to the end 
of the reporting period. 
10.9 Net goodwill 
Include: 
 
the net amount of goodwill after impairment. 
10.10 Net intangible assets 
Deduct accumulated amortisation and impairment from the gross values for intangible assets 
with a finite life, intangible assets with an infinite life and goodwill.  
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 29 
11. Other assets 
11.1 Interest receivable  
Include: 
 
interest accrued for but not yet received. 
11.2 General insurance premiums and other receivables 
11.3 Deferred acquisition costs – general insurance policies 
11.4 Capitalised debt raising/funding costs 
Report costs associated with debt raisings and other similar transaction related costs. 
11.5 Capitalised costs associated with establishing/setting up securitisation 
vehicles/programs 
Report the balance of securitisation establishment costs that are capitalised and deferred. 
11.6 Capitalised loan and lease origination fees and commissions paid to mortgage 
originators and brokers  
Report origination fees and commissions deferred. 
11.7 Other capitalised expenses of a general nature 
Report any other capitalised expenses not reported above. 
11.8 Derivative financial instruments 
Include: 
 
all derivatives entered into after adoption of International Financial Reporting 
Standards (IFRS) consistent with the classification and measurement basis used for 
derivatives by institutions in accordance with AASB 132, AASB 7 and AASB 9. This 
applies to trading and banking book derivatives. Derivative financial instruments in 
existence prior to adoption of IFRS are to be reported in accordance with AASB 1 First-
time Adoption of Australian Accounting Standards (AASB 1). 
11.8.1 Trading book derivatives 
11.8.2 Banking book derivatives 
11.9 Amounts receivable from clients – Outstanding security settlements 
For those institutions that have broking activity (i.e. equity broking) with clients who are 
other than financial institutions, record the amount due from clients in relation to security 
settlement transactions. Do not include amounts receivable from financial institutions or 
clearing houses in relation to security settlements, as these are to be recorded in a separate 
asset heading ‘Due from Financial Institutions’ and ‘Due from Clearing Houses’. 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 30 
11.10 Deferred tax assets 
Tax assets are defined in accordance with AASB 112 Income Taxes (AASB 112). 
Recognition of DTA are to be made in accordance with AASB 112. 
The amounts calculated and recognised for DTA must be noted separately in the following 
categories:  
11.10.1 From tax losses 
Report all DTA arising out of tax losses in accordance with AASB 112. 
11.10.2 From specific provision and General Reserve for Credit Losses 
Report all DTA associated with the provisioning for asset impairment in accordance with 
AASB 112. 
11.10.3 Other 
Report all DTA other than from tax losses, specific provision and general reserve for credit 
losses. 
11.11 Loan/credit card servicing rights 
Report the carrying value of purchased loan (e.g. mortgages) and credit card relationships 
when the reporting entity purchases the right to receive existing loan payments and credit 
card receivables in consideration for providing lending and credit card services to those 
customers. Also report any purchased loan/credit card servicing rights arising in the 
acquisition of an entire financial institution. The carrying value consists of the cost of the 
servicing right less accumulated amortisation for the right.  
11.12 Defined benefit assets 
Include: 
 
defined benefit assets i.e. surplus consistent with the classification and measurement 
basis used in AASB 119 Employee Benefits (AASB 119). 
11.13 Non-current assets and disposal groups classified as held for sale 
Include: 
 
non-current assets and disposal groups classified as held for sale consistent with 
classification and measurement basis used in AASB 5 Non-current Assets Held for Sale 
and Discontinued Operations (AASB 5). 
11.14 Items in suspense 
Report suspense or unreconciled/unidentified transactions/balances here. A list of examples is 
not provided as these may vary between institutions. It is recommended that the institution’s 
internal procedures be adopted regarding the recording and reporting of these types of 
balances.  
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 31 
11.15 Other 
Include all other assets not separately identified above.  
For example, include: 
 
commodities other than gold bullion; 
 
valuables; 
 
artwork; 
 
other receivables (e.g. fees and commissions receivable); and 
 
prepayments. 
Exclude: 
 
deposits, loans and other claims on related parties that are resident entities (claims on 
non-resident related parties should be reported to the appropriate memo item). These 
claims should be reported to the relevant item above. 
11.16 Total other assets 
Sum all the reporting items listed under ‘Other assets’. 
12. Total assets  
Sum total assets including Australian dollar denominated assets and foreign currency 
denominated assets.  
12.1 Of which: Due from associated entities/joint ventures 
Section B: Liabilities 
1. Due to clearing houses 
Include: 
 
amounts due to recognised clearing houses such as the ASXCH and SFXCH in 
Australia. Include margin calls from stock and derivative exchanges which are payable.  
2. Due to financial institutions 
2.1 Total due to financial institutions  
Include: 
 
settlement account balances – Austraclear, and RITS balances with Australian banks 
and non-bank financial institutions; 
 
amounts owing to Australian banks and other financial institutions in relation to the 
payments system; and 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 32 
 
items in the course of collection – due to Australian banks and other financial 
institutions in relation to the payments system. 
 
settlement account balances due to the RBA. Funds borrowed from the RBA should 
also be reported in this data item. 
 
settlement account balances due to Australian ADIs. 
 
settlement account balances due to RFCs. 
 
settlement account balances due to other Australian financial institutions.  
This reporting item should be brought to account at the gross value of the outstanding 
balance. Interest is taken to profit and loss when earned. 
3. Acceptances 
Acceptances comprise undertakings by an ADI to pay bills of exchange drawn on customers. 
The ADI expects most acceptances to be presented before being reimbursed by the 
customers. These bills of exchange are not held as part of the ADI’s asset portfolio. 
Acceptances are accounted for and disclosed as a liability with a corresponding contra asset. 
The contra asset is recognised to reflect the ADI’s claim against each drawer of the bills of 
exchange. 
Bills of exchange that have been accepted and held in an ADI’s asset portfolio should be 
excluded from this item. Include these holdings of own acceptances under either securities 
held for trading or securities not held for trading. 
Netting is allowed in accordance with the requirements specified in the Australian accounting 
standards (i.e. only if there is a legal right to set off and there is an intention to settle on a net 
basis, or realise the assets and settle the liability simultaneously). 
Acceptances generate fee income that is taken to profit and loss when earned. 
4. Deposits 
4.1 Call/on demand 
Include the following:  
 
Cheque 
Accounts which provide checking facilities of any kind. This account can either be interest 
bearing or non-interest bearing. This account may be linked with other accounts offering 
transaction or non-transaction facilities. Do not include accounts which have a cheque facility 
but a cheque book has never been issued. 
 
Other payment methods 
Accounts from which payments may be made to third parties – Automated Teller Machines 
(ATMs), debit card or another electronic device.  
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 33 
All deposits are to be reported net off any setoffs (only if in accordance with AASB 132, 
AASB 7 and AASB 9).  
 
notice of withdrawal account 
A written notice required before funds can be withdrawn or transferred out of the account; 
 
demand deposits; 
 
savings deposits; 
 
money market deposit accounts on a call/demand basis; 
 
other savings deposits on a call/demand basis; and 
 
11am accounts and 24-hour money. 
Exclude from this classification: 
 
negotiable and transferable certificates of deposit; 
 
subordinated debt issues; 
 
subordinated loans; 
 
loans due to the parent entity, controlled entities, associated entities, joint venture 
entities and other branches under the same parent entity; 
 
securities sold under agreements to repurchase; 
 
treasury related short-term borrowings from other ADIs; and 
 
promissory notes. 
4.2 Term deposits 
An account in which money has be placed for a fixed period for a stated interest rate. 
4.3 Certificates of deposit 
Certificates of deposit are negotiable bearer debt securities. They are issued at a discount to 
the face value and do not require endorsement when sold. 
4.4 Other 
Record in aggregate all other forms of deposits that are not included in the deposit account 
classifications noted above. 
4.5 Total deposits 
Sum the total of ‘Call/on demand’, ‘Term deposits’, ‘Certificates of deposit’ and ‘Other’. 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 34 
5. Other borrowings 
Include: 
 
securities sold under agreements to repurchase; 
 
subordinated loans with a residual maturity of 12 months or less; 
 
short-term loans due to the parent entity, controlled entities, associated entities, joint 
venture entities and other branches under the same parent entity; 
 
treasury related short-term borrowings from other ADIs; 
 
promissory notes with a residual maturity of 12 months or less; 
 
commercial paper with a residual maturity of 12 months or less; and 
 
short-term debt securities from the parent entity, controlled entities, associated entities, 
joint venture entities and other branches under the same parent entity. 
Exclude: 
 
negotiable and transferable certificates of deposits; 
 
subordinated loans, promissory notes, commercial paper with a residual maturity 
greater than 12 months; and 
 
deposits. 
5.1 Securities sold under agreements to repurchase 
These transactions are to be recorded consistently with AASB 9. Where the transferee of the 
stock effectively receives a lender’s rate of return (i.e. the underlying risks and rewards of 
ownership of the underlying stock is not effectively transferred), these transactions are to be 
accounted for as collateralised lending activities (treating stock lending as on balance sheet 
exposures). Securities sold under agreements to repurchase, represents the payable due to 
counterparties with whom the stock has been lent and from whom cash has been lodged. 
Under this method of accounting the bank’s physical stock positions recorded on the balance 
sheet in either Securities held for trading or Securities not held for trading sections is not 
affected.  
5.2 Promissory notes/commercial paper 
Report all borrowings by the reporting entity in the form of commercial paper or promissory 
notes. Commercial paper or promissory notes are short-term debt securities usually issued 
with an original term to maturity of less than 180 days.  
Include: 
 
all commercial paper or promissory notes issued with a residual term to maturity of 12 
months or less. Commercial paper or promissory notes with a residual maturity greater 
than 12 months should be reported as ‘long-term borrowings’. 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 35 
5.3 Short-term loans 
Report all borrowings by the reporting entity in the form of short-term debt securities, other 
than certificates of deposits and promissory notes/commercial paper (identified above). 
Include: 
 
all debt securities issued with a residual term to maturity of 12 months or less. Other 
debt securities with a residual maturity greater than 12 months should be reported as 
‘long-term debt’. 
5.3.1 Short-term loans: Variable 
Report all borrowings by the reporting entity in the form of variable interest rate short-term 
loans from counterparties.  
A loan is considered to be short-term if its residual term to maturity is of 12 months or less. 
Amounts due to clearing houses should be separately identified and reported as ‘Due to 
clearing houses’. Settlement account balances should be separately identified and reported as 
‘Due to financial institutions’. 
5.3.2 Short-term loans: Fixed 
Report all borrowings by the reporting entity in the form of fixed interest rate short-term 
loans from counterparties.  
A loan is considered to be short-term if its residual term to maturity is of 12 months or less. 
Amounts due to clearing houses should be separately identified and reported as ‘Due to 
clearing houses’. Settlement account balances should be separately identified and reported as 
‘Due to financial institutions’. 
5.4 Total other borrowings 
Sum the component parts listed under ‘Other borrowings’. 
6. Income tax liability 
Recognition of current and deferred tax liabilities are to be made in accordance with AASB 
112. In addition, this should relate to Australian business operations. 
6.3 Total income tax liability 
Sum the income tax liability items relating to Australian business operations. 
7. Provisions 
7.1 Dividends 
A provision for dividends is the allowance that the reporting entity has made in terms of the 
obligation for declared dividends.  
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 36 
7.2 Employee entitlements 
Include: 
 
provisions for long service leave, annual leave, staff housing loan benefits, health fund 
subsidy and other employee entitlements. This should be reported in accordance with 
the requirements of AASB 119. 
7.3 Non-lending losses 
Include: 
 
provision for self insurance; 
 
frauds; 
 
litigation, fraud detection and prevention; 
 
forgeries; and 
 
non-transferred insurance risks. 
7.4 Mortgage insurance claims and unearned premiums 
7.5 Restructuring costs 
Report all provisions raised for the restructuring of an organization. 
Include: 
 
severance, termination and redundancy payments; and 
 
integration costs. 
7.6 Other provisions 
Report all other provisions not identified above. 
Include: 
 
specific provision for off-balance sheet credit related commitments; 
 
leased premises surplus to current requirements; and 
 
provision for subsidiary integration costs. 
7.7 Total provisions 
Sum all the ‘provisions’ reporting items. 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 37 
8. General Insurance Outstanding Claims and Unearned Premium Liability 
9. Life Insurance Policy Liabilities 
10. Unvested Policy Holder Benefits 
11. Bonds, notes and long-term borrowings 
Bonds, notes and long-term borrowings have a residual term to maturity of more than one 
year. This includes loans and debt securities. 
11.1 Debt securities  
Report debt securities that have been issued in Australia and have a residual term to maturity 
of more than one year. Measurement is to be consistent with Australian accounting standards. 
As a guide include: 
 
bonds; 
 
debentures; 
 
unsecured notes; 
 
fixed-interest securities; 
 
MTNs; 
 
inflation-indexed bonds; 
 
FRNs; 
 
other floating-rate debt securities; 
 
asset-backed bonds; 
 
non-participating preference shares (a special type where the holder has no entitlement 
to a share in the residual value on dissolution of the issuing company); 
 
subordinated bonds and notes;  
 
Euro notes; 
 
Euro bonds; and 
 
Euro medium-term notes. 
As a guide exclude: 
 
hybrid securities; 
 
trading derivatives; 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 38 
 
convertible notes prior to conversion; 
 
negotiable and transferable certificates of deposit; 
 
subordinated debt issues with a residual maturity of 12 months or less; 
 
promissory notes with a residual maturity of 12 months or less; and 
 
commercial paper with a residual maturity of  12 months or less. 
11.2 Loans  
Report the face value of all loans and borrowings from Australian residents that have a 
residual term to maturity of more than one year. 
Include: 
 
secured and unsecured borrowings; 
 
financial lease agreements; 
 
term loans; 
 
mortgages; 
 
commercial loans; 
 
equity participation in leveraged leases; 
 
redeemable preference share finance; and 
 
loans due to related parties that are resident entities. 
Exclude: 
 
loan capital (e.g. subordinated loans); 
 
short-term loans due to related parties that are resident entities; and 
 
treasury related short-term borrowings from other banks. 
11.2.1 Loans – Variable rate 
Report the face value of all variable interest rate loans and borrowings from Australian 
residents that have a residual term to maturity of more than one year. 
11.2.2 Loans – Fixed rate 
Report the face value of all fixed interest rate loans and borrowings from Australian residents 
that have a residual term to maturity of more than one year. 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 39 
11.3 Total bonds, notes and long-term borrowings  
Sum the total face value of all ‘Bonds, notes and long-term borrowings’ issued or raised in 
Australia. 
12. Creditors and other liabilities 
12.1 – 12.2 Defined benefit liabilities 
Include: 
 
defined benefit liabilities i.e. deficit broken up into current and non-current, consistent 
with the classification and measurement basis used in AASB 119. 
Distinctions between current and non-current defined benefit liabilities are to be made in 
accordance with AASB 101 Presentation of Financial Statements (AASB 101). 
12.3 Interest payable 
Include: 
 
interest accrued for but not yet paid. 
12.4 Unearned interest 
Include: 
 
interest received but not yet earned e.g. interest received in advance on fixed interest 
loan portfolio. 
12.5 Amounts payable to clients - Outstanding security settlements 
For those institutions that have broking activity with clients who are other than financial 
institutions, record the amount due to clients in relation to security settlement transactions. 
Do not include amounts payable to financial institutions or clearing houses in relation to 
security settlements, as these are to be recorded in a separate liability heading ‘Due to 
Financial Institutions’ and ‘Due to Clearing Houses’. 
12.6 Derivative financial instruments  
Include: 
 
all derivatives entered into after adoption of IFRS consistent with the classification and 
measurement basis used for derivatives by institutions in accordance with AASB 132, 
AASB 7 and AASB 9. This applies to trading and banking book derivatives. Derivative 
financial instruments in existence prior to adoption of IFRS are to be reported in 
accordance with AASB 1. 
12.7 Items in suspense  
Report suspense or unreconciled/unidentified transactions/balances here that are in a liability 
position. A list of examples is not provided as these may vary between institutions. It is 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 40 
recommended that the institutions internal procedures be adopted regarding the recording and 
reporting of these types of balances.  
12.8 Due to merchants  
12.9 Liabilities included in disposal groups classified as held for sale 
Include: 
 
liabilities included in disposal groups classified as held for sale consistent with AASB 5 
(paragraph 38). 
12.10 Share capital repayable on demand 
Applicable to Credit Unions and Building Societies, this includes members’ shares in co-
operatives classified as liabilities consistent with AASB 132 and AASB 7.  
12.11 Other 
Include: 
 
other liabilities not separately identified above e.g. unearned fees and commission 
received in advance but not recognised as earned for accounting purposes. 
12.12 Total creditors and other liabilities 
Sum the reporting items listed under ‘Creditors and other liabilities’. 
13. Loan capital and hybrid securities 
Report the face value of all loan capital and hybrid securities that have been issued in 
Australia and have a residual term to maturity of more than one year. 
Classification is to be consistent with AASB 132 and AASB 7. 
As a guide include: 
 
preference shares; 
 
convertible notes; and 
 
subordinated loans of a residual maturity of more than one year. 
13.1 Members withdrawable shares 
Include the value of ADI member withdrawable shares.  This item should be prepared in 
accordance with the APRA prudential treatment and not applicable accounting standards.  
For prudential purposes, an ADI member share is classified as a liability and is not capital.  In 
the event of redemption, the liability would be reduced by the issue value of shares redeemed. 
13.2 Loan capital 
As a guide include: 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 41 
 
subordinated loans of a residual maturity of more than one year. 
13.3 Hybrid securities 
As a guide include: 
 
converting preference shares; and 
 
convertible notes. 
13.4 Total loan capital and hybrid securities 
Total all ‘Loan capital and hybrid securities’ items listed above. 
14. Total liabilities  
Sum total liabilities.  
14.1 Of which: Due to associated entities/joint ventures 
15. Net Assets 
Calculated as ‘Total assets’ less ‘Total liabilities’. 
Section C: Shareholders’ equity 
1. Share capital 
1.1 Ordinary shares 
Include: 
 
ordinary share capital on issue. 
1.2 Preference shares 
Preference shares have a priority over dividend payments and to the assets of the reporting 
company. 
1.3 Other 
Include: 
 
any other form of share capital not included above (e.g. income securities). 
1.4 Total share capital 
2. Reserves 
2.1 General reserve 
This is derived from revenue profits and is mostly available for dividend payment. 
Exclude: 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 42 
 
from General Reserve any portion of General Reserve for Credit Losses that forms part 
of Shareholders’ Equity.  These excluded amounts are to be recorded in the General 
Reserve for Credit Losses column in the assets section of this form. 
2.2 Capital profits reserve 
Capital profits reserve represents the realised value of revaluations associated with an asset or 
class of assets that have been disposed of. These assets have been subject to the fair value 
basis of measurement and revaluations accounted for in accordance with accounting standard 
AASB 116.  Due to the disposal of these assets, the balance of the asset revaluation reserve 
(ARR) associated with these assets has been transferred to a capital profits reserve. 
2.3 Asset revaluation reserve 
2.3.1 Owner-occupied property 
Include: 
 
ARR relating to the revaluation of owner-occupied property. 
2.3.2 Plant and equipment 
Include: 
 
balance of the ARR relating to the revaluation of property, plant and equipment. 
2.3.3 Investments in associates/share of associates 
Include: 
 
the balance of the ARR relating to the revaluation of investments in associates 
2.3.4 Intangibles revaluation surplus 
Include: 
 
balance of the ARR relating to the revaluation of intangible assets. 
2.3.5 Relating to non-current assets or disposal groups held for sale 
Include: 
 
the balance of the ARR relating to revaluation of non-current assets or disposal groups 
held for sale in accordance with AASB 5. 
2.3.6 Other 
ARR relating to the revaluation of other assets. 
2.3.7 Total asset revaluation reserve 
Sum the reporting items listed under ‘Asset revaluation reserve’. 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 43 
2.4 Foreign currency translation reserve  
Include: 
 
the exchange rate differences arising on translation of assets and liabilities in 
accordance with AASB 121. 
2.5 Fair Value Through OCI Reserve 
 2.5.1 Marketable securities 
Include: 
 
Fair value through OCI reserve for all marketable securities (debt and equity) consistent 
with the classification and measurement basis used by institutions in accordance with 
AASB 130 and AASB 7. 
2.5.2 Other 
Include: 
 
Fair value through OCI reserve for loans and advances and all other items not 
separately identified above, consistent with the classification and measurement basis 
used in AASB 9, AASB 132 and AASB 7. 
2.6 Cash flow hedge reserve  
Include: 
 
the effective portion of the gain or loss on the cash flow hedging instrument as required 
by AASB 9, AASB 132 and AASB 7. 
2.7 Share based payments reserve 
Include: 
 
the equity settled share based payments reserve amounts as required by AASB 2 Share 
based Payments (AASB 2). 
2.8 Other reserves 
Include: 
 
all reserves not separately identified above. Report dividend reinvestment plan reserve 
in this reporting item. 
2.9 Total reserves 
Sum the reporting items listed under ‘Reserves’. 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019
July 2019 
ARF 322.0 Instructions   - 44 
3. Retained profits 
4. Shareholders’ Equity attributable to Shareholders of the Company 
5. Minority interests 
6. Total shareholders’ equity 
Sum the reporting items ‘Shareholders’ equity’. 
 
 
 
Authorised Version F2019L00828 registered 17/06/2019


--- End of file: ARS 322 Statement of Financial Position.txt ---

PRUDENTIAL PRACTICE 
GUIDE 
PRUDENTIAL 
PRACTICE GUIDE 
CPG 229 Climate Change Financial Risks 
November 2021 
Disclaimer and Copyright 
This prudential practice guide is not legal advice and users are encouraged to obtain 
professional advice about the application of any legislation or prudential standard 
relevant to their particular circumstances and to exercise their own skill and care in 
relation to any material contained in this guide. 
APRA disclaims any liability for any loss or damage arising out of any use of this 
prudential practice guide. 
© Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) 
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Australia Licence  
(CCBY 3.0). This licence allows you to copy, distribute and adapt this work, provided you 
attribute the work and do not suggest that APRA endorses you or your work. To view a full 
copy of the terms of this licence, visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/au/ 
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY 
2 
Contents 
About this guide 
4
Introduction 
5
The financial risks of climate change 
7
Governance 
10
Risk management 
12
Policies and procedures 
12
Risk identification 
12
Risk monitoring 
13
Risk controls 
14
Risk reporting 
15
Scenario analysis 
16
Disclosure 
19
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
3 
 
About this guide 
Prudential practice guides (PPGs) provide guidance on APRA’s view of sound practice in 
particular areas. PPGs frequently discuss legal requirements from legislation, regulations or 
APRA’s prudential standards, but do not themselves create enforceable requirements. 
This PPG aims to assist an APRA-regulated institution in complying with Prudential Standards 
CPS 220 Risk Management (CPS 220), SPS 220 Risk Management (SPS 220), CPS 510 Governance 
(CPS 510), SPS 510 Governance (SPS 510) and, more generally, to outline prudent practices in 
relation to climate change financial risk management. 
In this PPG, the term: 
• 
‘climate risks’ refers to the financial risks arising from climate change, including 
physical, transition and liability risks; and 
• 
‘APRA-regulated institution’ refers to an authorised deposit-taking institution (ADI), a 
registrable superannuation entity (RSE) licensee (RSE licensee), a general insurer, a life 
company (including friendly societies), a private health insurer, an authorised non-
operating holding company (NOHC) and, where applicable, Level 2 and Level 3 groups.  
This PPG is designed to be read together with CPS 220, SPS 220, CPS 510 and SPS 510, but 
does not address all prudential requirements in relation to risk management and 
governance.  
Subject to meeting the requirements of the prudential standards, an APRA-regulated 
institution has the flexibility to configure its approach to climate risk management in a 
manner best suited to achieving its business objectives. Not all of the practices outlined in 
this PPG are relevant for every institution, and some aspects may vary depending upon the 
size, business mix and complexity of the institution. 
 
 
 
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
4 
 
Introduction 
1.
The risks of a changing climate extend to all sectors of the economy. The need to adapt to 
the changing climate will also bring new business opportunities. Within the financial 
sector, a prudent institution will consider both the financial opportunities and the 
financial risks of climate change as it sets its strategy.
2.
APRA’s mandate is to ensure that, under all reasonable circumstances, financial 
promises made by APRA-regulated institutions are met within a stable, efficient and 
competitive financial system. APRA is seeking to ensure that APRA-regulated institutions 
manage the risks and opportunities that may arise from a changing climate in line with 
APRA’s approach to other types of risks.
3.
The information in this guide does not impose new requirements in relation to climate 
risks: rather, it supports compliance with APRA’s existing risk management and 
governance requirements and provides guidance to assist an institution to manage 
climate risks (Figure 1). In keeping with APRA’s mandate, this guidance does not seek to 
determine an institution’s individual investment, lending or underwriting decisions, but 
does aim to ensure that these decisions are well-informed.
4.
This PPG reflects the established framework for considering and managing climate risks 
developed by the Financial Stability Board’s Task Force on Climate-related Financial 
Disclosures (TCFD)
1
1 Financial Stability Board Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures, Final Report: Recommendations of 
the task force on climate-related financial disclosures (June 2017). 
, as well as good practice observed through APRA’s own analysis. 
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY 
5 
Figure 1. 
Overview of APRA’s climate change financial risk guidance 
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
6 
 
The financial risks of climate change 
5.
The financial risks of climate change, including physical climate risks, transition climate
risks, and liability risks (Figure 2) are referred to in this guidance collectively as climate
risks.
6.
Physical climate risks, including both longer-term changes in climate (chronic risk) as
well as changes to the frequency and magnitude of extreme weather events (acute risk),
can cause direct damage to assets or property, changes to income and costs, and
changes to the cost and availability of insurance.
7.
Transition climate risks include risks related to changes in domestic and international
policy and regulatory settings, technological innovation, social adaptation and market
changes, which can result in changes to costs, income and profits, investment
preferences and asset viability.
8.
Climate change may also give rise to liability risks which have implications for
businesses and directors’ duties. Liability risks stem from the potential for litigation
where institutions and boards do not adequately consider or respond to the impacts of
climate change.
Figure 2. 
Climate change financial risks 
9.
A prudent institution would take a strategic and risk-based approach to the management
of the various risks and opportunities arising from climate change, recognising the
unique nature and far-reaching potential impacts of a changing climate.
10. It is important for institutions to understand the interaction between climate risks and
their business activities, including the compounding effect climate risks may have on an
institution’s other risks, including:
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY 
7 
a)
credit risk – through a potential increase in defaults on loans by businesses and
households that may be affected by adverse climate events, as well as the potential
for assets used as collateral to decline in value;
b)
market risk – through the impact of potential re-pricing of financial instruments and
corporate debt affecting the value of securities held on an institution’s balance
sheet;
c)
operational risk – including the risk of supply chain disruption and forced facility
closures;
d)
insurance risk – through a potential increase in insured losses as a result of more
frequent and/or extreme weather events;
e)
liquidity risk – through an increased demand for liquidity to respond to extreme
weather events, the difficulties that may be faced in liquidating assets negatively
impacted by climate risks, or through funding risks associated with cost or
availability of wholesale debt; and
f)
reputational risk – including an institution’s ability to attract and retain customers
and employees due to changing employee and community expectations.
11. While APRA considers that climate risks can and should be managed within an
institution’s broader risk management framework, the financial risks associated with
climate change have a number of elements that distinguish them from other financial
risks, and necessitate a strategic approach to their management. These elements
include:
a)
the potential for irreversible changes in climate, leading to impacts that may not be
easily mitigated or reversed;
b)
the far-reaching impact that climate risks pose to all parts of the financial system,
including different business types, geographical locations and economic sectors, as
well as the potential for risks to manifest across multiple lines of business at the
same time;
c)
the uncertain and extended time horizon over which climate risks may materialise,
which is likely to extend beyond typical business planning cycles; and
d)
the unprecedented nature of climate change, meaning that historical data and
traditional backward-looking risk assessment methods are unlikely to adequately
anticipate future impacts.
12. How and when specific climate risks will materialise is uncertain, but there is a high
degree of certainty that some financial risks will materialise as a result of climate
change. An institution can mitigate the magnitude of the impacts of these financial risks
through governance, risk management, scenario analysis and disclosure. Investing in
better risk management will also allow institutions to identify and benefit from
opportunities that arise from the transition to a lower-emissions economy, including
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY 
8 
meeting increasing investor demand for sustainable finance and identifying customers 
that are well positioned to respond to climate change (Figure 3).  
Figure 3. 
Climate risks, opportunities and financial impact
2
2 Adapted from Financial Stability Board Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures, Final Report: 
Recommendations of the task force on climate-related financial disclosures (June 2017). 
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY 
9 
Governance 
13. Prudential standards CPS 510 and SPS 510 set out the minimum governance
requirements of an APRA-regulated institution. The ultimate responsibility for the sound
and prudent management of an APRA-regulated institution’s business operations rests
with its board of directors
3
3 For the purposes of this PPG, a reference to the board, in the case of a foreign ADI, Category C insurer or an 
eligible foreign life insurance company (EFLIC), is a reference to the Senior Officer Outside of Australia or 
Compliance Committee (as applicable) as referred to in Prudential Standard CPS 510 Governance. 
. APRA therefore considers it prudent practice for the board to
seek to understand and regularly assess the financial risks arising from climate change
that affect the institution, now and into the future.
14. APRA is of the view that climate risks can and should be managed within an institution’s
overall business strategy and risk appetite, and a board should be able to evidence its
ongoing oversight of these risks.
15. The board of an institution may delegate certain functions of the management of climate
risks but, as with other risks, needs to maintain mechanisms for monitoring the exercise
of this delegated authority. Board-level engagement is important to ensure that work on
climate risks holds sufficient standing within an institution, and gives the board the
requisite institution-wide insights to strategically respond to the risks.
16. In fulfilling its obligations under CPS 510 and SPS 510, a prudent board is, in overseeing
the management of climate risks, likely to:
a)
ensure an appropriate understanding of, and opportunity to discuss, climate risk at
the board and sub-committee levels, which may include appropriate training for
board members;
b)
set clear roles and responsibilities of senior management in the management of
climate risks, and hold senior management to account for these responsibilities;
c)
re-evaluate the risks, opportunities and accountabilities arising from climate change
on a periodic basis, and consider these risks and opportunities in approving the
institution’s strategies and business plans;
d)
take both a shorter-term view (consistent with the institution’s regular business
planning horizon) and longer-term view when assessing the impact of climate risks
and opportunities; and
e)
ensure that, where climate risks are found to be material, the institution’s risk
appetite framework incorporates the risk exposure limits and thresholds for the
financial risks that the institution is willing to bear.
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY 
10 
17. In light of the board responsibilities set out in Paragraph 16, an institution’s senior
management would typically be responsible for:
a)
applying an institution’s risk management framework to assess and manage climate
risk exposures on an ongoing basis, including developing and implementing
appropriate policies;
b)
regularly reviewing the effectiveness of the framework, policies, tools, and metrics
and targets, and making appropriate revisions;
c)
providing recommendations to the board on the institution’s objectives, plans,
strategic options and policies as they relate to climate risks that are assessed to be
material. This may include the establishment and use of relevant tools, models, and
metrics and targets to monitor exposures to climate risks so as to enable the board
to make informed decisions in a timely manner; and
d)
ensuring that adequate resources, skills and expertise are allocated to the
management of climate risks, including thorough training and capacity building
amongst relevant staff.
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY 
11 
Risk management 
18. Under CPS 220 and SPS 220, the board of an APRA-regulated institution is ultimately 
responsible for both the institution’s risk management framework, and for the oversight 
of its operation by management. Senior management of the institution monitor and 
manage all material risks consistent with the strategic objectives, risk appetite 
statement and policies approved by the board. APRA considers it prudent for climate 
risks to be considered within an institution’s existing framework, including the board-
approved risk appetite statement, risk management strategy and business plan.  
19. A prudent institution would seek to ensure that its arrangements to identify, measure, 
monitor, manage, and report on its exposure to climate risks are conducted in a manner 
appropriate to the institution’s size, business mix and complexity of its business 
operations.  
Policies and procedures 
20. APRA considers that prudent practice would be for an institution to evidence the 
management of climate risks within its written risk management policies, management 
information, and board risk reports. Where climate risks are material, this may require 
updating existing risk management policies and procedures.  
21. As a matter of good practice, the policies and procedures developed under the risk 
management framework would include a clear articulation of the respective roles and 
responsibilities of business lines and risk functions (i.e. Line 1 and Line 2 activities) in 
relation to managing climate risks. 
Risk identification  
22. A prudent institution would seek to understand climate risks and how they may affect its 
business model, including being able to identify material climate risks and assess their 
potential impact on the institution. Scenario analysis, with both a shorter- and longer-
term time horizon, is a useful tool for informing the risk identification process (see 
further discussion on scenario analysis in Paragraphs 37 to 46). 
23. CPS 220 and SPS 220 identify categories of risk that the risk management framework 
must cover at a minimum. Climate risks can be considered within these established risk 
categories. A prudent institution would be able to demonstrate how it determines the 
materiality of climate risk within each of these categories. 
24. A prudent institution would likely seek to identify economic sectors with higher or lower 
exposures to physical and/or transition climate risks. The risk criteria for this 
identification may include a range of factors, such as:  
a) 
vulnerability to extreme weather events;  
b) 
the level of greenhouse gas emissions;  
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
12 
 
c)
potential exposure to changes in climate-related policy or technology;
d)
vulnerability to climate-related supply chain changes or disruption;
e)
vulnerability to climate-related disruption of business activities; and/or
f)
linkages to unsustainable practices.
The assessment of economic sectors may be used to develop sector-specific policies and 
procedures for the institution when undertaking business engagements (such as 
investing, insuring or lending) with that sector. Good practice would see an integrated 
approach to climate risks taken across different business lines (such as underwriting, 
investment, product development and lending functions). 
25. APRA views it to be appropriate for an institution to consider and record any material
impact on capital adequacy as a result of climate risks. An institution may choose to use
the Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process (ICAAP) for this purpose. An
institution that is not required to complete an ICAAP may benefit from adopting a similar
approach to recording any material exposures and how the assessment of those
exposures is considered, for example within stress testing policies and processes.
Risk monitoring 
26. Better practice in monitoring climate risks includes both a qualitative and quantitative
approach, including developing metrics to measure and monitor climate risks
appropriate to an institution’s size, business mix and complexity of business operations.
Such metrics might typically be used, for example, to assess portfolio exposures to
geographical areas and economic sectors with higher or lower climate risk
4
4 Further guidance on the metrics an institution may develop is provided by the Financial Stability Board Task 
Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures, Implementing the Recommendations of the Task Force on 
Climate-related Financial Disclosures (June 2017). 
.
27. More advanced quantitative risk metrics may take a variety of forms, such as direct and
indirect emissions (usually classified into scope 1, scope 2 and relevant scope 3
emissions
5
5 Scope 1 refers to all direct greenhouse gas emissions arising from a business’ own activities. Scope 2 refers to 
indirect greenhouse gas emissions from the use of purchased electricity, heat or steam. Scope 3 refers to other 
indirect emissions not covered in Scope 2 that occur in the value chain of the reporting company, including both 
upstream and downstream emissions. Relevant scope 3 emissions for finance sector entities includes the scope 
1, scope 2 and material scope 3 emissions from businesses to which they have a financial exposure (e.g. 
through lending activities, insurance products, and investments), or the scope 3 emissions of emissions-
intensive inputs to their businesses. For further information, see Financial Stability Board Task Force on 
Climate-related Financial Disclosures, Final Report: Recommendations of the task force on climate-related 
financial disclosures (June 2017), and the Greenhouse Gas Protocol’s Corporate Value Chain (Scope 3) Accounting 
and Reporting Standard and Technical Guidance for Calculating Scope 3 Emissions.  
), exposure to physical risks, monitoring potential impacts to core business
metrics such as credit risk, losses or investment returns, modelling the impact of
climate scenarios on project returns and/or quantifying the impact of adaptation
measures.
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY 
13 
28. Quantitative metrics would assist an institution in understanding the potential current
and future impacts of climate change on its customers, counterparties, and
organisations to which the institution has an exposure. Where an institution does not
have the necessary information to assess these impacts, it is appropriate for the
institution to engage with customers and counterparties to form an understanding of the
extent to which the impacts may be material to the institution’s own risks.
29. A prudent institution is likely to use data from both publicly available and proprietary
sources, and potentially seek assistance from external experts where necessary
(including academics, specialist consultants, and scientific bodies). This data may be
used to better understand the possible impacts of climate change on its own operations
as well as those of its customers, counterparties, and organisations to which the
institution is exposed.
30. A prudent institution may also wish to set climate-related targets for its activities. A
climate-related target is a specific level, threshold, quantity, or qualitative outcome that
an institution wants to achieve, over a defined time horizon, to assist in managing its
climate-related risks and opportunities. Climate-related targets should be linked to an
institution’s climate-related metrics, and aligned to an institution’s overall business
strategy and risk management framework. The climate-related targets established by an
institution may also reference external benchmarks, such as sector, national and/or
international targets
6
6   Further guidance on the targets an institution may develop is provided by the Financial Stability Board Task 
Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures, Implementing the Recommendations of the Task Force on 
Climate-related Financial Disclosures (June 2017). 
.
31. Given the evolving understanding of climate change, a prudent institution would ensure
that climate risk data, metrics and targets were updated regularly to support decision-
making by the institution’s board and senior management. It would also consider the
circumstances which might trigger a review of its strategy or engagement with
customers and counterparties.
32. Better practice in risk monitoring extends to monitoring the impacts that climate risks
may have on outsourcing arrangements, service providers, supply chains and business
continuity planning.
Risk controls 
33. Where an institution has identified material climate risks, a prudent institution would
establish and implement plans to mitigate these risks and manage its exposures, as well
as regularly review and assess the effectiveness of those plans. For example, an
institution might develop plans to manage concentrations in its portfolio for certain
geographic or economic sectors with higher climate risks.
34. In most cases, APRA envisages that an institution would choose to work with customers,
counterparties and organisations which face higher climate risks, to improve the risk
profile of those entities. Indeed, providing finance to assist customers to adapt to climate
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY 
14 
change is an important function of the financial system. However, where the institution 
considers this engagement will not result in the climate risks being adequately 
addressed, an institution may need to consider standard risk mitigation options such as: 
a)
reflecting the cost of the additional risk through risk-based pricing measures;
b)
applying limits on its exposure to such an entity or sector; or
c)
where the risks cannot be adequately addressed through other measures,
considering the institution’s ability to continue the relationship.
Risk reporting 
35. To facilitate well-informed decision-making, APRA expects that a prudent institution
would establish procedures to routinely provide relevant information on its material
climate risk exposures, including monitoring and mitigation actions, to the board and
senior management. This information would allow the board and senior management to
understand and review the activities, and to make decisions consistent with the
institution’s overall risk appetite and risk management approach.
36. The extent and frequency of reporting should be tailored to the nature and magnitude of
the risks to which the institution is exposed.
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY 
15 
Scenario analysis 
37. In fulfilling their obligations under CPS 220, it would be prudent for institutions to develop 
capabilities in climate risk scenario analysis and stress testing, or to have access to 
external scenario analysis and stress testing capabilities. This analysis would inform their 
risk identification over both the shorter- and longer-term. Scenario analysis and stress 
testing for climate risks is a developing area, and APRA expects approaches to evolve and 
mature over time; however, the expectation of future improvements in approach is not a 
justification for delaying its use.
38. APRA expects the use of scenario analysis and stress testing for climate risks to be 
proportionate to an institution’s size, business mix and complexity. In general, larger and 
more complex institutions, with a wider range of business activities, would be expected to 
have more advanced analytical capability. However, depending on its business model, a 
smaller institution may be highly concentrated in a particular market, sector or 
geographical location that is exposed to material climate risks. In such circumstances it 
may be appropriate for the institution to seek assistance with scenario analysis and stress 
testing to assess the impact of climate risks on its risk profile and business strategies, 
and to explore its resilience to financial losses under a range of outcomes.
39. An institution in the early stages of climate risk analysis is likely to begin by developing an 
understanding of the material risks to which it is exposed, including identifying industries 
and regions with particular risks within the institution’s portfolio. A range of analytical 
approaches, from simple to complex, could be used to support an institution’s 
understanding of their material climate risks: an institution should choose approaches 
appropriate to its circumstances.
40. Where an institution lacks the data, resources or expertise to conduct climate risk stress 
testing with appropriate quantitative assessments, it may still benefit from narrative-
driven scenario analysis
7
7 Climate risk narratives provide an overview of a climate scenario, and typically include a description of the 
economic, policy, technology and social (and other) features of the scenario. Narrative-driven scenario analysis 
can use these features of climate scenarios as a basis for a qualitative evaluation of potential climate risks. 
. Qualitative scenarios can provide insights into the operations 
and channels of risk transmission, and findings from such an assessment can be 
reflected in business plans, strategies and risk management practices.
41. When conducting more advanced quantitative climate risk analysis, an institution would 
typically seek to identify and simulate scenarios which are both plausible and relevant to 
the institution’s operations. Climate risk scenario analysis is a developing area, and not 
all institutions will have the capability to undertake best practice analysis. However, in 
developing their capability, institutions should have regard to leading practice which 
entails:
a)
A shorter-term assessment of the institution’s current exposures to climate risks, in 
line with current business planning cycles. 
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY 
16 
b)
A longer-term assessment of the institution’s future exposures based on a range of 
different climate-related scenarios, potentially extending to 2050 or beyond. Key 
considerations when building such scenarios include:
i)
Future temperature rise:
•
global average temperatures continuing to rise in the absence of mitigatin g
actions and policies (for example, an emission trajectory consistent with 
global average warming of 3˚C or more above historic temperatures by
 
2100
8
8   It is standard practice for temperature pathways to refer to a level of average global warming by the year 2100, 
relative to a 1850-1900 baseline: as such, a 3
OC temperature scenario in 2100 would generally correlate with a 
lesser temperature rise in 2050. APRA does not expect entities to conduct long-term assessments out to 2100. 
), leading to greater physical climate risks; and
•
limiting global average temperature increase to well below 2˚C by 2100,
consistent with the Paris Agreement, reducing the magnitude of longer-
term physical risks;
ii)
Economic transition pathway:
•
an orderly transition to a lower-emissions economy, with policies a nd
activities to address climate change being introduced early and graduall y
becoming more stringent, minimising both physical and transition risks ;
and
•
a disorderly transition to a lower-emissions economy, with delayed action t o
reduce emissions leading to an increase in acute transition risks.
c)
Incorporating both qualitative and quantitative factors into the scenarios used to 
project the future financial conditions of an institution
9
9 Qualitative factors could include direction of change (e.g. warmer temperatures) or economic features (e.g. 
increased trade and globalisation) of a scenario. Quantitative factors could include emissions budgets, targets 
and trajectories, emissions prices and a wide range of other factors. 
.
d)
Assessing both physical and transition risks within each scenario used.
e)
Seeking input from external experts such as academics, scientific bodies and/or 
specialist consultants, while maintaining appropriate internal knowledge an d
oversight to ensure that the results of any outsourced analysis are credible, realist ic
and understood by the institution.
f)
Measuring the impact of climate risks on a range of business obligations an d
considerations, including capital adequacy, liquidity, and the ability (as appropriat e)
to meet obligations to depositors, policyholders and superannuation fund members.
g)
Incorporating forward-looking information into its scenario analysis, such as by
 
considering future trends in catastrophe risks, technology innovation or policy
 
development. Analysis that relies solely on historical data has the potential to
 
systematically underestimate the impacts of climate risks, due to the complex
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY 
17 
dynamics of interconnected lines of business and the non-linear and unprecedented 
levels of disruption. 
42. When selecting inputs into its climate assessments, an institution seeking to adopt better 
practice would have regard to: 
a) 
the time horizon of datasets used, including the need for appropriate longer-term 
timeframes as well as sufficient temporal resolution for the risks assessed (for 
example, some physical risks might require seasonal data, while annual or decadal 
data may be appropriate for other risks); 
b) 
geographic specificity, ensuring that local extreme weather events and locations to 
which an institution may be exposed are represented;  
c) 
the impact of multiple extreme weather events arising concurrently; and 
d) 
the range of global emissions pathways included in a dataset and the capacity for a 
model to evaluate simulations and projections, noting that testing scenarios at the 
extreme ranges is more likely to identify risks. 
43. Where institutions publicly disclose the results of their climate risks scenario analysis or 
stress testing, they should also disclose significant design features and decisions that 
are necessary for stakeholders to be able to effectively interpret the results and compare 
them between institutions.   
44. Useful guidance on conducting scenario selection and analysis to assess the impacts of 
climate risks has been produced by organisations such as the TCFD
10
10  See Financial Stability Board Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures Technical supplement: The use 
of scenario analysis in disclosure of climate-related risks and opportunities (June 2017).  
, the Climate 
Measurement Standards Initiative
11
11  See Climate Measurement Standard Initiative, Scenario analysis of climate-related physical risk for buildings and 
infrastructure: Climate science guidance (September 2020). 
, and the Network for Greening the Financial System
12
12  See Network for Greening the Financial System, Guide to climate scenario analysis for central banks and 
supervisors (June 2020). 
. 
45. For an APRA-regulated institution incorporating the financial risks of climate change in 
its ICAAP, APRA considers a narrative-driven process to be a useful approach to 
considering climate risk scenario analysis and stress testing to assess potential risk 
exposures and available capital resources. 
46. A prudent institution would maintain appropriate documentation of the method and 
results of its climate risk scenario analysis and stress testing, including an assessment 
of the limitations of the analysis for assessing the climate risks faced by the institution. 
Material results should be communicated to the institution’s board and senior 
management, and used to inform business planning and strategy setting, as well as 
setting and reviewing the institution’s overall climate risk management approach. 
                                                     
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
18 
 
Disclosure 
47. The disclosure of decision-useful, forward-looking climate risk information allows 
interested stakeholders to assess an institution’s resilience to climate risks. 
48. With increasing demand from investors and other stakeholders for disclosure on 
climate-related risks, a lack of absolute certainty in relation to climate risks’ future 
impacts should not be considered a reason to avoid disclosure of exposure to these risks. 
49. Beyond any statutory or regulatory requirements, a prudent institution would consider 
whether additional, voluntary disclosures could be beneficial in enhancing transparency 
and giving confidence to the wider market in the institution’s approach to measuring and 
managing climate risks. 
50. APRA considers it better practice for any disclosures to be produced in line with the 
framework established by the TCFD
13
13  For further guidance, see the Financial Stability Board Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures 
Recommendations of the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures: Final Report (June 2017). 
. 
51. APRA anticipates the demand for reliable and timely climate risk disclosure will increase 
over time, and for institutions with international activities there is a need to be prepared 
to comply with mandatory climate risk disclosures in other jurisdictions. APRA considers 
that a prudent institution would continually look to evolve its own disclosure practices, 
and to regularly review disclosures for comprehensiveness, relevance and clarity, to 
ensure it is well-prepared to respond to evolving expectations in relation to climate-
related disclosures.  
                                                     
AUSTRALIAN PRUDENTIAL REGULATION AUTHORITY  
19 
 
 


--- End of file: CPG 229 Climate Change Financial Risks.txt ---

Prudential Practice Guide
CPG 235 – Managing Data Risk
September 2013
www.apra.gov.au
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
2
Disclaimer and copyright
This prudential practice guide is not legal advice and 
users are encouraged to obtain professional advice 
about the application of any legislation or prudential 
standard relevant to their particular circumstances and 
to exercise their own skill and care in relation to any 
material contained in this guide.
APRA disclaims any liability for any loss or damage 
arising out of any use of this prudential practice guide.
© Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA)
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons 
Attribution 3.0 Australia Licence (CCBY 3.0). 
 This licence allows you to copy, 
distribute and adapt this work, provided you attribute 
the work and do not suggest that APRA endorses you 
or your work. To view a full copy of the terms of this 
licence, visit www.creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/3.0/au/.
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
3
Prudential practice guides (PPGs) provide guidance on 
APRA’s view of sound practice in particular areas. PPGs 
frequently discuss legal requirements from legislation, 
regulations or APRA’s prudential standards, but do not 
themselves create enforceable requirements.
This PPG aims to assist regulated entities in managing 
data risk. It is designed to provide guidance to 
senior management, risk management and technical 
specialists (both management and operational). 
The PPG targets areas where APRA continues to 
identify weaknesses as part of its ongoing supervisory 
activities. The PPG does not seek to provide an all-
encompassing framework, or to replace or endorse 
existing industry standards and guidelines.
Subject to meeting APRA’s prudential requirements, a 
regulated entity has the flexibility to manage data risk 
in a manner that is best suited to achieving its business 
objectives. Not all of the practices outlined in this PPG 
will be relevant for every regulated entity and some 
aspects may vary depending upon the size, complexity 
and risk profile of the entity.
About this guide
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
4
Contents
Introduction	
6
Data and data risk	
7
Definition	
7
Data risk management	
7
Data quality	
8
Classification by criticality and sensitivity	
8
Industry baselines	
8
A systematic and formalised approach	
8
Overarching framework	
8
Principles-based approach	
9
Roles and responsibilities	
9
Ongoing compliance	
10
Ongoing assessment of effectiveness	
10
Data architecture	
10
Staff awareness	
11
Training and awareness programs	
11
Staff education areas	
11
Data life-cycle management	
11
Data risk considered at all stages	
11
Capture	
11
Processing	
11
Retention	
12
Publication	
12
Disposal	
12
Other control considerations	
13
Auditability	
13
Desensitisation	
13
End-user computing	
13
Outsourcing/offshoring of data management responsibilities	
13
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
5
Data validation	
14
Assessment of fitness for use	
14
Data cleansing	
15
Monitoring and management of data issues	
15
Monitoring processes	
15
Data issue management	
15
Data quality metrics	
16
Data risk management assurance	
16
Assurance program	
16
Frequency of assurance	
16
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
6
Introduction
1.	 The management of data and associated risks is 
important for a broad range of business objectives 
including meeting financial and other obligations 
to stakeholders, effective management and proper 
governance. This prudential practice guide (PPG) 
provides guidance on data risk management 
where weaknesses continue to be identified as 
part of APRA’s ongoing supervision activities. 
2.	 While this PPG provides guidance for managing 
data and complying with APRA’s prudential 
requirements, it does not seek to be an all-
encompassing framework. APRA expects that a 
regulated entity using a risk-based approach will 
implement controls around data, including in areas 
not addressed in this PPG, appropriate for the size, 
nature and complexity of its operations.
3.	 Data is essential for a regulated entity to achieve 
its business objectives. Furthermore, reliance 
on data has increased as a result of process 
automation and greater reliance on analytics 
and business intelligence to support decision-
making. Consequently, stakeholders including the 
Board of directors (Board), senior management, 
shareholders, customers and regulators have 
heightened expectations regarding the effective 
management of data. This trend has enhanced 
the importance of treating data as an asset1 in its 
own right. 
4.	 This PPG aims to provide guidance to senior 
management, risk management, business and 
technical specialists. The multiple audiences reflect 
the pervasive nature of data, and the need for 
sound risk management disciplines and a solid 
business understanding to effectively manage a 
regulated entity’s data risk profile. Additionally, 
effective data risk management can facilitate 
business initiatives and assist compliance with 
other regulatory and legal requirements. 
1	 ‘Asset’ is used here to represent anything deemed to be of value (either 
financial or otherwise) by an entity.
5.	 As with any process, governance is vital to ensure 
that data risk management and related business 
processes are properly designed and operating 
effectively to meet the needs of the regulated 
entity. In APRA’s view, effective governance of 
data risk management would be aligned to the 
broader corporate governance frameworks and 
involve the clear articulation of Board and senior 
management responsibilities and expectations, 
formally delegated powers of authority and 
regular oversight.
6.	 Subject to the requirements of APRA’s prudential 
standards, an APRA-regulated entity has the 
flexibility to manage data risk in the way most 
suited to achieving its business objectives.
7.	 A regulated entity would typically use discretion 
in adopting whichever industry standards and 
guidelines it sees fit-for-purpose in specific 
control areas. This PPG does not seek 
to replace or endorse any existing industry 
standards or guidelines. 
8.	 The relevance of the content of this PPG will differ 
for each regulated entity, depending upon factors 
such as the nature, size, complexity, risk profile 
and risk appetite of the entity. The nature and 
specific usage of the data (current or potential) 
will also have an impact on the application 
of this PPG. APRA envisages that an entity’s 
approach to managing data risk would also take 
into consideration the resources the entity has 
as its disposal, including whether the business is 
supported by an in-house technology function or 
an external service provider. Such factors will assist 
an entity in determining the relevance and extent 
to which it adopts the practices in this PPG.
9.	 This PPG also provides examples to illustrate 
a range of controls that could be deployed to 
address a stated principle. These examples are not 
intended to be exhaustive compliance checklists.
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
7
Data and data risk
Definition
10.	 Data2  refers to the representation of facts, 
figures and ideas. It is often viewed as the lowest 
level of abstraction from which information and 
knowledge are derived. 
11.	 Data risk encompasses the risk of loss resulting 
from inadequate or failed internal processes, 
people and systems or from external events 
impacting on data. Consideration of data risk is 
relevant regardless of whether the data is in hard 
copy or soft  copy form. Examples include:
(a)	 fraud due to theft of data; 
(b)	 business disruption due to data corruption 
or unavailability; 
(c)	 execution delivery failure due to inaccurate 
data; and 
(d)	 breach of legal or compliance obligations 
resulting from disclosure of sensitive data.
12.	 For the purposes of this PPG, data risk is 
considered to be a subset of operational risk, 
which includes information and information 
technology risk.  In addition, information and 
information technology security risk overlaps with 
data risk (refer to the diagram below).3 
2	 For the purposes of this PPG, data encompasses a broad range of 
categories including data that is entered, calculated, derived and 
structured or unstructured.
3	 For further details, refer to Prudential Practice Guide PPG 234 – 
Management of security risk in information and information technology 
(PPG 234), which incorporates data (both hard and soft copy) as a 
subset of information and information technology assets.
	
Data risk can adversely affect a regulated entity 
and could result in a failure to meet business 
objectives (including regulatory and legal 
requirements). Consequently, it is important 
that business functions understand and manage 
the risks associated with the data required for 
the successful execution of their processes. 
Additionally, an understanding of data risk is 
beneficial when managing other types of risk.
Data risk management
13.	 A regulated entity would typically manage data risk 
in alignment with the operational risk framework 
and, where relevant, in conjunction with other 
risk management frameworks (e.g. credit, market 
and insurance risk management frameworks), 
depending on the nature of the data involved. 
14.	 A goal of data risk management is to ensure that 
the overall business objectives of a regulated entity 
continue to be met. Therefore, it is important 
that an individual business unit’s objectives 
are not considered in isolation, but rather in 
the context of the objectives of the entity as a 
whole. Consequently, the design of controls for 
a particular data set would typically take into 
account all usage of that data.
15.	 The adequacy of data controls in ensuring that a 
regulated entity operates within its risk appetite 
would normally be assessed as part of introducing 
new business processes and then on a regular 
basis thereafter (or following material change to 
either the process, usage of data, internal controls 
or external environments). The assessment would 
typically take into account the end-to-end use 
of the data and related control environment 
(including compensating controls). Changes to the 
control environment would typically follow normal 
business case practices, taking into account the 
likelihood and impact of an event against the cost 
of the control.  
Operational risk 
(including information & information technology)
Data risk
Information and Information 
Technology (IT) security risk
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
8
Data quality
16.	 In APRA’s view, a useful technique for managing 
data risk is through the assessment and 
management of data quality. Data quality can 
be assessed using a range of dimensions. The 
relevance of each of these dimensions will 
vary depending upon the nature of the data. 
Dimensions typically considered in the assessment 
of data quality include:
(a)	 accuracy: the degree to which data is error 
free and aligns with what it represents; 
(b)	 completeness: the extent to which data is not 
missing and is of sufficient breadth and depth 
for the intended purpose; 
(c)	 consistency: the degree to which related data 
is in alignment with respect to dimensions 
such as definition, value, range, type and 
format, as applicable;
(d)	 timeliness: the degree to which data is up-
to-date; 
(e)	 availability: accessibility and usability of data 
when required; and
(f)	 fitness for use: the degree to which data 
is relevant, appropriate for the intended 
purpose and meets business specifications.
17.	 Other dimensions that could also be relevant, 
depending on the nature and use of specific 
data, include: 
(a)	 confidentiality: restriction of data access to 
authorised users, software and hardware;
(b)	 accountability: the ability to attribute the 
responsibility for an action; 
(c)	 authenticity: the condition of being 
genuine; and
(d)	 non-repudiation: the concept that an event 
cannot later be denied. 
Classification by criticality and sensitivity
18.	 For the purposes of managing data risk, a regulated 
entity would typically classify data based on business 
criticality and sensitivity. The assessment would 
typically take into account the end-to-end use of 
the data. A regulated entity could seek to leverage 
the existing business impact analysis process to 
achieve this. The entity’s data classification method 
and granularity would normally be determined by 
the requirements of the business.
Industry baselines
19.	 A regulated entity could find it useful to 
regularly assess the completeness of its data risk 
management processes by comparison to peers 
and established control frameworks and standards.
A systematic and formalised approach
Overarching framework
20.	In order to ensure that data risk management 
is not conducted in an ad hoc and fragmented 
manner, a regulated entity would typically adopt a 
systematic and formalised approach that ensures 
data risk is taken into consideration as part of 
its change management and business-as-usual 
processes. This could be encapsulated in a formally 
approved data risk management framework 
outlining the entity’s approach to managing data 
risk that:
(a)	 includes a hierarchy of policies, standards, 
guidelines, procedures and other 
documentation supporting business processes;
(b)	 aligns with other enterprise frameworks 
such as operational risk, security, project 
management, system development, business 
continuity management, outsourcing/
offshoring management and risk management;
(c)	 includes the expectations of the Board and 
senior management;
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
9
(d)	 assigns a designated owner or owners;
(e)	 outlines the roles and responsibilities of 
staff to ensure effective data risk 
management outcomes;
(f)	 enables the design and implementation of 
data controls. The strength of controls would 
normally be commensurate with the criticality 
and sensitivity of the data involved; and
(g)	 is reviewed on a regular basis, with periodic 
assessment for completeness against current 
practices and industry standards.
	
A data management framework could be defined 
at an enterprise-wide level, a business unit level, or 
as a component of other enterprise frameworks, 
as appropriate.
21.	 The establishment and ongoing development 
of the data risk management framework would 
normally be:
(a)	 directed by a data risk management strategy 
and supporting program of work with a clearly 
defined budget, resource requirements, 
timeframes and milestones; and 
(b)	 an integral part of a regulated entity’s change 
management and business-as-usual processes. 
	
A data risk management strategy would typically 
be aligned with the regulated entity’s business, 
information technology, and security strategies 
as appropriate.
Principles-based approach
22.	APRA envisages that a regulated entity would 
adopt a set of high-level principles in order 
to establish a sound foundation for data risk 
management.  Data risk management principles 
could include: 
(a)	 access to data is only granted where required 
to conduct business processes;
(b)	 data validation, correction and cleansing occur 
as close to the point of capture as possible;
(c)	 automation (where viable) is used as an 
alternative to manual processes;
(d)	 timely detection and reporting of data issues 
to minimise the time in which an issue can 
impact on the entity;
(e)	 assessment of data quality to ensure it is 
acceptable for the intended purpose; and
(f)	 design of the control environment is based 
on the assumption that staff do not know 
what the data risk management policies and 
procedures are.
	
In addition, a number of specific security 
management principles are also relevant (refer to 
Prudential Practice Guide 234 Management of security 
risk in information and information technology for 
further details).
Roles and responsibilities
23.	A key element in effective data risk management 
is the allocation of formal roles and responsibilities 
(pertaining to data) to appropriately skilled 
staff. This would typically articulate the data risk 
management responsibilities of staff, customers, 
service providers and other third parties. Common 
areas of consideration when formalising data 
management roles and responsibilities include:
(a)	 data roles and responsibilities for general 
staff and data users;
(b)	 data-specific roles and responsibilities, 
as applicable (e.g. data officers4, data 
custodians5, data owners/stewards6, 
designated business sponsor). These could 
form part of an individual’s broader roles and 
responsibilities; 
(c)	 governance functions and reporting 
mechanisms to assess the ongoing 
effectiveness of the data risk management 
framework and ensure a continued focus on 
data risk and the escalation of data issues;
(d)	 risk management, assurance and 
compliance roles;
4	 A data officer is responsible for data processing and usage.
5	 A data custodian is responsible for the safe custody, transport and 
storage of data.
6	 A data owner/steward is responsible for authorising access to data and  
its quality.
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
10
(e)	 data risk management framework roles 
(if applicable) including maintenance, 
ongoing review, compliance monitoring, 
training and awareness; and 
(f)	 responsibilities for data monitoring 
and management. 
Ongoing compliance
24.	APRA expects that a regulated entity would 
implement processes that ensure compliance with 
regulatory and legal requirements and data risk 
management requirements. This would typically 
include ongoing checks by the compliance 
function (or equivalent), supported by reporting 
mechanisms (e.g. metrics, exceptions) and 
management reviews.
25.	A regulated entity would be expected to 
implement an exemption policy for handling 
instances of non-compliance with the data risk 
management framework (if relevant), including 
management of the exemption register, authority 
for granting exemptions, expiry of exemptions 
and the review of exemptions granted. Where 
exemptions are granted, APRA envisages that an 
entity would review and assess the adequacy of 
compensating controls initially and on an ongoing 
basis. Compensating controls would normally 
reduce the residual risk in line with the entity’s 
risk appetite.
Ongoing assessment of effectiveness
26.	APRA envisages that a regulated entity would 
regularly assess data quality and evaluate the 
effectiveness of data risk management, and make 
any necessary adjustments to ensure identified 
control gaps are treated in a timely and systematic 
manner. This could involve establishing a data 
improvement program that specifies target metrics, 
timeframes for resolution and associated action 
plans for closing any gaps identified. Typically, action 
plans would be prioritised and tracked.
Data architecture
27.	 In order to ensure that data risk management is 
effective, it is important that a regulated entity:
(a)	 understands the nature and characteristics of 
the data used for business purposes;
(b)	 is able to assess the quality of the data; 
(c)	 understands the flow of data and processing 
undertaken (i.e. data lineage); and
(d)	 understands the data risks and 
associated controls. 
28.	Data risk management could be supported by the 
use of data architecture practices. These practices 
assist in understanding how data is captured, 
processed, retained, published and disposed of. 
The sophistication of the data architecture7 would 
normally be commensurate with data risk. A data 
architecture could include:
(a)	 a data strategy as a component of the 
broader business and information technology 
strategies, as relevant;
(b)	 information on the characteristics of the 
data, commonly referred to as metadata.8 
This could include definitions, descriptions, 
sources, usages, update mechanisms, owners, 
authorised users, criticality, sensitivity and 
quality requirements;
(c)	 diagrams and detailed technical information 
that describe the underlying data structure9, 
the flow of data, key systems and data 
repositories and interfaces;
(d)	 description of the controls necessary across 
the various stages of the data life-cycle10; and
(e)	 standards and guidelines to facilitate the 
development of systems, data repositories, 
interfaces (including exchange of data with 
external parties) and data controls. This would 
normally include approved technologies (e.g. 
applications, data base management systems 
and data integration tools).
7	 This can range from system documentation provided by vendors to an 
enterprise-wide data architecture.
8	 Metadata is often embodied in a data dictionary.
9	 Data structure is often embodied in data models.
10	 Refers to the end-to-end life-cycle of data from the initial point of 
capture through to disposal. This differs from the system development 
life-cycle.
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
11
29.	APRA envisages that the data architecture would 
normally align with a regulated entity’s established 
policies, standards and guidelines. An entity would 
normally maintain the data architecture as part 
of its change management, project management 
and system life-cycle processes. This includes 
controls to ensure alignment to the standards and 
guidelines embodied in the data architecture.
Staff awareness
Training and awareness programs
30.	A regulated entity would be likely to benefit from 
developing an initial and ongoing training and 
awareness program. For staff who do not have 
specific data risk management responsibilities, 
this would typically be incorporated as part of 
ongoing business process-specific or broader risk 
management training, as applicable. 
31.	 A regulated entity could also consider 
incorporating data risk management 
responsibilities as a component of staff 
performance plans, as appropriate. 
Staff education areas
32.	In APRA’s view, a regulated entity would regularly 
educate users as to their responsibilities in 
maintaining data quality. Common areas covered 
could include:
(a)	 ensuring the quality of data entered;
(b)	 verifying the level of data quality prior to 
its use; 
(c)	 mechanisms for reporting data quality issues 
and concerns; and
(d)	 adherence to the regulated entity’s data-
related policies and standards. 
Data life-cycle management
Data risk considered at all stages
33.	APRA envisages that a regulated entity would 
ensure that data risk is considered at each stage 
of its life-cycle and that appropriate controls are 
implemented to ensure that data requirements are 
met. Data-related life-cycle stages typically include 
data capture, processing, retention, publication 
and disposal.
Capture
34.	Data capture controls, including manual entry of 
data as well as automated data feeds from internal 
business units and external sources, would typically 
be designed to ensure that newly introduced data 
meets data quality requirements. Controls in this 
area could include:
(a)	 user interfaces that conduct appropriate 
validation before data is accepted;
(b)	 mechanisms to detect if automated data feeds 
are functioning as expected and to prevent 
erroneous data from progressing beyond 
the capture stage and prevent downstream 
processing from proceeding; and
(c)	 specification of data quality requirements 
and the mechanisms for handling data quality 
issues included in agreements with internal 
and external parties.
Processing
35.	A regulated entity would typically implement 
controls to ensure that data processing 
(the application of business rules to data, 
including regulatory and legal requirements) 
and the output generated continue to meet data 
quality requirements. This would usually include 
controls over:
(a)	 data integration (combining data from 
different sources) to manage the extraction, 
transformation and loading mechanisms;
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
12
(b)	 acquisition and implementation via 
approved development, change and project 
management methodologies to ensure that 
data quality is not compromised by changes 
to the production environment; 
(c)	 exception handling to identify and respond 
to data quality issues in a timely manner; and
(d)	 error-handling to ensure data is able be 
restored or corrected to a known level of 
data quality. This is commonly achieved 
through a variety of mechanisms including 
database management system checkpoint 
and rollback capabilities, data backup and 
recovery, and the design of automated 
processes so they can be re-run if required.
Retention
36.	Data retention controls would typically be in 
place to ensure that data requirements are not 
compromised as a result of risks associated with 
the storage of data. This includes data hosting 
that is outsourced and/or located offshore. 
APRA’s prudential standards and prudential 
practice guides on security, business continuity 
management and outsourcing provide specific 
requirements and guidance in this area.
37.	 A regulated entity could find it beneficial to 
develop a formal retention strategy that addresses 
the risks associated with data accessibility, 
and takes into account archiving and recovery 
requirements. Common issues in this area include 
accidental deletion, data corruption, changes 
in technology and poor asset management. 
The retention strategy would normally include 
mechanisms to ensure that data retention 
complies with business requirements, including 
regulatory and legal requirements.  
38.	As part of data retention, a regulated entity 
would normally implement robust protocols for 
data correction including approval and review 
of data changes, and maintenance of audit trails 
for tracking data changes. These controls would 
typically include appropriate segregation of duties, 
to reduce the potential for the actions of an 
individual to compromise data quality.
Publication
39.	Data publication refers to the production of 
information for internal and external stakeholders 
(e.g. operational information, management 
information, customer information, media 
releases, regulatory reporting). Controls would 
typically be in place to ensure that published 
data meets the understood content and quality 
requirements of users. Examples include:
(a)	 acquisition and implementation controls as 
part of the introduction of new publication 
mechanisms (e.g. management review 
and approval, change management, 
project management and system 
development life-cycle); 
(b)	 validation and monitoring controls to ensure 
published data continues to meet the 
specified requirements of users; and
(c)	 processes to manage data issues raised 
by users.   
40.	In APRA’s view, it is important that data quality 
requirements are clearly specified and that 
confidentiality is not compromised through the 
publication of data. 
41.	 Additionally, depending on the nature of usage, 
there could be benefit in a regulated entity 
including metrics with the data to provide users 
with an indication of the level of data quality 
(e.g. the level of completeness and accuracy). 
Disposal
42.	Disposal controls would typically be in place 
to ensure:
(a)	 data is disposed of in compliance with the 
retention strategy; and
(b)	 business requirements with respect to 
confidentiality are not compromised as 
hardware, software or data reach the end of 
their useful life or the hardware/software is 
recommissioned for another use. 
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
13
	
Examples include the deletion of sensitive 
information prior to the disposal or 
recommissioning of hardware, archiving data 
prior to decommissioning systems and the 
removal of data following disaster recovery 
testing, if appropriate.
Other control considerations
Auditability
43.	Auditability (the ability to confirm the origin of 
data and provide transparency of all alterations) is 
a key element to verifying data quality. It involves 
the examination of data and associated audit 
trails11, data architecture and other supporting 
material. APRA envisages that a regulated entity 
would ensure that data is sufficiently auditable in 
order to satisfy the entity’s business requirements 
(including regulatory and legal), facilitate 
independent audit, assist in dispute resolution 
(including non-repudiation) and assist in the 
provision of forensic evidence if required.
Desensitisation
44.	Desensitisation (the process of reducing a data 
set’s sensitivity to a level which complies with 
the authorised access of the end-user) is a useful 
approach for maintaining the confidentiality 
of data while extending its usage. Common 
approaches include the use of cryptographic12 or 
de-identification13 techniques when transferring 
data to a less trusted environment (including the 
public domain). The strength of desensitisation 
should take into account the ability to reconstruct 
the original data set using other data available or 
brute force techniques.14   
11	 Evidence (e.g. log files, paperwork) of the sequence of activities that 
have affected data through a specific operation, procedure, or event.
12	 Methods used to transform data/information using an algorithm 
to make it unreadable to anyone except those possessing special 
knowledge, usually referred to as a key.
13	 The removal of identifying information (e.g. name, date of birth)
14	 A brute force technique is a method of defeating a desensitisation 
process by systematically trying a large number of possibilities.
End-user computing
45.	Current technologies allow for end-users to 
develop/configure software for the purpose 
of automating day-to-day business processes, 
facilitating decision-making and storing data. In 
addition, software is increasingly designed to 
enable extraction of data by users. This creates a 
risk that data life-cycle controls may be inadequate 
given that end-user developed/configured 
software is not typically subject to the controls 
that a technology function would apply.15
46.	A regulated entity would normally introduce 
processes to identify the existence of end-user 
developed/configured software and assess its 
risk exposure. In APRA’s view, any software that is 
used for the processing and retention of critical or 
sensitive data would comply with the relevant life-
cycle controls of the entity.
Outsourcing/offshoring of data management 
responsibilities
47.	 Continued industry developments allow a 
regulated entity to more easily move data 
management responsibilities to service providers 
or other entities within a group (both on- and 
offshore). This increases the risk that data life-
cycle controls may be inadequate, with problems 
potentially magnified when offshoring is involved. 
The possible causes of this increased risk include 
control framework variations, lack of proximity, 
reduced corporate allegiance, geopolitical risks 
and jurisdictional-specific requirements. 
48.	APRA expects a regulated entity to apply 
a cautious and measured approach when 
considering retaining data outside the jurisdiction 
it pertains to. It is important that a regulated entity 
is fully aware of the risks involved and makes a 
conscious and informed decision as to whether 
the additional risks are within its risk appetite.
15	 For further details, refer to PPG 234.
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
14
49.	When outsourcing/offshoring data management 
responsibilities, APRA expects that a regulated 
entity would be able to demonstrate the following:
(a)	 ability to continue operations and meet core 
obligations following a loss of services; 
(b)	 maintenance of the quality of critical or 
sensitive data;
(c)	 compliance with legislative and prudential 
requirements; and
(d)	 a lack of impediments (from jurisdictional 
hurdles or technical complications) to APRA 
being able to fulfil its duties as prudential 
regulator (including timely access to data in a 
usable form).
50.	In APRA’s view, the following would normally 
be applied to the assessment and ongoing 
management of outsourced/offshored data 
management responsibilities:
(a)	 enterprise frameworks such as security, 
project management, system development, 
business continuity management, 
outsourcing/offshoring management, risk 
management and delegation limits;
(b)	 detailed risk assessments of the specific 
arrangements underlying the services 
offered. This would normally include 
assessments of the service provider, the 
location from which the services are to be 
provided and the criticality and sensitivity of 
the data involved;
(c)	 a detailed understanding of the extent and 
nature of the business processes16 and the 
sensitivity/criticality of the data impacted by 
the arrangement;
(d)	 alignment with the data architecture 
supporting the broader information 
technology and business strategies;
(e)	 a business case justifying the additional 
risk exposures;
16	 Including those pertaining to decision-making and support.
(f)	 Board/senior management’s understanding, 
acceptance and approval of the resulting risk 
profile; and
(g)	 periodic reassessment of risks in line with the 
entity’s risk management framework.
Data validation
Assessment of fitness for use
51.	 Data validation is the assessment of the data 
against business rules to determine its fitness 
for use prior to further processing. It constitutes 
a key set of controls for ensuring that data meets 
quality requirements. 
52.	Regulated entities typically implement data 
validation controls (whether via manual or 
automated mechanisms) at the point of capture 
and at various points throughout the data’s life-
cycle. APRA envisages that the strength of the 
validation controls would be commensurate with 
the nature of the data and its classification. 
53.	Considerations when validating data include the 
level of trustworthiness (e.g. is the data from a 
provider with a known control environment and 
track record) and the extent to which data quality 
degrades over time. In APRA’s view, regulated 
entities would design business processes to 
revalidate data on a periodic basis to minimise 
the degree of data quality degradation. The 
comprehensiveness of revalidation would normally 
be commensurate with the criticality of the data 
and the risk of degradation.
54.	Common forms of data validation include 
verification of format, type, value range, currency, 
presence, consistency and completeness. Data 
validation can also be usefully conducted at a data-
set level such as the use of:
(a)	 control totalling: aggregation techniques 
including hash totalling17, amount totalling 
and record counts; 
(b)	 reconciliation:  comparing two sets of data 
and explaining variances; 
17	 The application of an algorithm to summarise a dataset in 
numeric terms.
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
15
(c)	 benchmarking: comparing two sets of 
data that would normally exhibit similar 
characteristics, in order to highlight 
material variations; 
(d)	 data profiling: examination of a data set and 
the gathering of statistics and other relevant 
information for the purposes of analysis to 
highlight any data anomalies (e.g. missing 
data, outliers, unexpected variances); and
(e)	 a review of data for reasonableness using 
expert judgement.
55.	In APRA’s view, where other validation controls 
cannot be easily implemented, a review of data for 
reasonableness using expert judgement would be 
beneficial as a minimum.
56.	A regulated entity would normally document 
data validation processes, including their nature, 
frequency and level of granularity, and provide 
clear allocation of accountabilities for the 
detection, investigation, reporting and escalation 
of data anomalies. In APRA’s view, data validation 
processes can be a key consideration when 
designing data quality metrics.
Data cleansing
57.	 Data cleansing is the act of detecting and 
correcting18 erroneous data. Erroneous data is 
anything that does not meet the quality objectives 
of the regulated entity. Entities would be expected 
to periodically cleanse data (e.g. as part of key 
business events such as member rollovers, claims, 
policy renewal) to ensure data quality remains 
at or above the required level. Data cleansing 
could also be required where the quality level 
requirements change over time (e.g. as a result 
of new usages or changes to existing processes) 
or when undergoing material change such as a 
system migration.
18	 Correction can include data removal or addition of missing data.
Monitoring and management of 
data issues
Monitoring processes
58.	APRA expects that a regulated entity would have 
monitoring processes to identify potential data 
issues. The strength of monitoring controls would 
typically be commensurate with the criticality and 
sensitivity of the data. APRA envisages that alerts 
would be investigated in a timely manner with an 
appropriate response to address anomalies. 
59.		Clear allocation of responsibility for regular 
monitoring of data, with appropriate processes 
and tools in place to manage the volume of 
monitoring required, would assist in reducing the 
risk of a data issue not being detected. 
Data issue management
60.	APRA envisages that a regulated entity would 
develop appropriate processes to manage 
all stages of a data issue including detection, 
identification, containment, investigation, 
evidence gathering, resolution, return to business-
as-usual and the adjustment of controls to reduce 
the risk of similar issues in the future. Common 
data issues include:
(a)	 processing errors impacting on the accuracy 
and completeness of balances and transactions; 
(b)	 lack of timeliness in updating data 
intended to reflect recent market 
conditions or assessments;
(c)	 inadequate data availability, accuracy or 
consistency resulting in pricing and 
valuation errors;
(d)	 data leakage leading to a breach 
of confidentiality; 
(e)	 failure to accurately execute instructions in a 
timely manner;
(f)	 failure to maintain data quality when 
migrating data to another system; and
(g)	 data that is not fit-for-use, resulting in poor 
business decisions.
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
16
61.	 Subject to the nature of the data, a regulated 
entity would:
(a)	 have clear accountability and communication 
strategies to limit the impact of data 
issues. This would typically include defined 
mechanisms and thresholds for escalation 
and reporting to the Board and senior 
management, and customer communication 
where appropriate. Issue management 
strategies would also typically assist in 
compliance with regulatory and legal 
requirements;  and
(b)	 conduct root cause analysis of the data issue, 
where the underlying cause of the issue is 
identified and analysed, with controls adjusted 
to reduce the likelihood of a future occurrence.
	
Due to resource constraints, regulated entities 
would normally prioritise remediation of data 
issues. A combination of tactical and strategic 
solutions may be required, depending on the root 
cause, including containment of identified issues. 
62.	In APRA’s view, it could be beneficial for data 
users to provide feedback to data providers,
both within the regulated entity as well as external 
parties, whenever data quality falls below the 
quality required. 
Data quality metrics
63.		Data quality metrics are a useful mechanism for 
assessing data quality and the success of data risk 
management. Typically, the use of metrics would 
be targeted to areas:
(a)	 where there are regulatory, legal and specific 
industry requirements; and
(b)	 that have the greatest sensitivity/criticality, as 
determined by the risk assessment process.
64.	Each dimension of data quality could be measured 
by at least one metric to enable the monitoring of 
progress towards set targets and the identification 
of issues and trends. Effective metrics would 
be specific, measurable, business oriented, 
controllable and reportable, and preferably involve 
the inspection of data to determine if a control 
is effective in maintaining data quality. Examples 
of data quality metrics could include error rates, 
timeliness measures, materiality thresholds and 
reconciliation exceptions over a specified period. 
65.	APRA envisages that data quality gaps would be 
addressed over time in a systematic way. This may 
involve the formulation of a data quality plan that 
specifies target data quality metrics, timeframes 
for resolution and associated action plans for 
closing any gaps. Action plans would typically be 
prioritised and tracked. 
Data risk management assurance
Assurance program
66.	APRA expects that a regulated entity would seek 
regular assurance that data quality is appropriate 
and data risk management is effective. This 
would normally be implemented through the 
broader assurance program and result in a 
systematic assessment of data risk and the control 
environment over time. Assurance responsibilities 
would typically be conducted by internal audit or 
another independent function.
Frequency of assurance
67.	 A regulated entity would benefit from a multi-
year schedule of testing that incorporates both 
adequacy and compliance-type reviews, with 
the program of work determined on a risk basis. 
Additional assurance work may be triggered by 
changes to vulnerabilities/threats or material 
changes to the business/information technology 
environment. Such reviews may encompass:
(a)	 inspection of data; 
(b)	 data risk management; 
(c)	 general information technology controls;
(d)	 data architecture;
(e)	 data governance; and 
(f)	 data metrics and data quality plans. 
68.	The schedule of testing would typically ensure 
that all aspects of the data control environment 
are assessed over time, commensurate with the 
sensitivity and criticality of the data.
Telephone
1300 55 88 49
Email
info@apra.gov.au
Website
www.apra.gov.au
Mail
GPO Box 9836
in all capital cities 
(except Hobart and Darwin)
PPG_CPG235_082013_ex


--- End of file: CPG-235-Managing-Data-Risk.txt ---

 
Banking, Insurance, Life Insurance and 
Superannuation 
(prudential 
standard) 
determination No. 2 of 2022  
Prudential Standard CPS 226 Margining and risk mitigation for 
non-centrally cleared derivatives 
Banking Act 1959 
Insurance Act 1973 
Life Insurance Act 1995  
Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993  
I, Renée Roberts, a delegate of APRA: 
 
(a) 
under subsections 11AF(3) of the Banking Act 1959 (the Banking Act), 32(4) of 
the Insurance Act 1973 (the Insurance Act), 230A(5) of the Life Insurance Act 
1995 (the Life Insurance Act), and 34C(6) of the Superannuation Industry 
(Supervision) Act 1993 (the SIS Act) REVOKE Banking, Insurance, Life 
Insurance, and Superannuation (prudential standard) determination No. 1 of 
2022, including Prudential Standard CPS 226 Margining and risk mitigation for 
non-centrally cleared derivatives made under that determination; 
 
(b) 
under subsection 11AF(1) of the Banking Act, DETERMINE the prudential 
standard in the form set out in the schedule, which applies to all ADIs and 
authorised banking NOHCs; 
 
(c) 
under subsection 32(1) of the Insurance Act, DETERMINE the prudential 
standard in the form set out in the schedule, which applies to all general 
insurers and authorised insurance NOHCs; 
 
(d) 
under subsection 230A(1) of the Life Insurance Act, DETERMINE the 
prudential standard in the form set out in the schedule, which applies to all life 
companies, including friendly societies, and registered life NOHCs; and 
 
(e) 
under subsection 34C(1) of the SIS Act, DETERMINE the prudential standard 
in the form set out in the schedule, which applies to all RSE licensees. 
 
This instrument commences on 1 January 2023.  
 
 
Authorised Version F2022L01578 registered 05/12/2022
Page 2 of 2 
 
Dated: 1 December 2022 
 
[signed] 
 
Renée Roberts 
Executive Director 
Policy and Advice Division 
Interpretation 
In this instrument: 
APRA means the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority. 
ADI has the meaning given in section 5 of the Banking Act. 
authorised banking NOHC has the meaning given to the expression authorised 
NOHC in section 5 of the Banking Act. 
authorised insurance NOHC has the meaning given to the expression authorised 
NOHC in subsection 3(1) of the Insurance Act. 
friendly society has the meaning given in section 16C of the Life Insurance Act. 
general insurer has the meaning given in section 11 of the Insurance Act. 
life company has the meaning given in the Schedule to the Life Insurance Act. 
registered life NOHC has the meaning given to the expression registered NOHC in 
the Schedule to the Life Insurance Act. 
RSE licensee has the meaning given in section 10 of the SIS Act. 
the prudential standard means Prudential Standard CPS 226 Margining and risk 
mitigation for non-centrally cleared derivatives. 
 
Schedule  
Prudential Standard CPS 226 Margining and risk mitigation for non-centrally cleared 
derivatives comprises the document commencing on the following page.
Authorised Version F2022L01578 registered 05/12/2022
January 2023 
 
 
Prudential Standard CPS 226  
Margining 
and 
risk 
mitigation 
for 
non-centrally cleared derivatives 
Objectives and key requirements of this Prudential 
Standard 
This Prudential Standard requires an APRA covered entity to have appropriate 
margining practices in relation to non-centrally cleared derivatives. An APRA 
covered entity must exchange variation margin and post and collect initial margin 
with a covered counterparty, subject to certain criteria. 
The key requirements of this Prudential Standard are that an APRA covered entity 
must: 
 
exchange variation margin and post and collect initial margin in transactions 
with a covered counterparty subject to certain criteria and the implementation 
timetables; 
 
use a zero threshold in the exchange of variation margin; 
 
post and collect initial margin on a gross basis calculated by either the 
standardised schedule or an approved model approach; 
 
ensure that initial margin is held in a manner that provides legal certainty to 
both counterparties in the event of insolvency or bankruptcy; and 
 
collect eligible collateral to satisfy margin requirements and apply appropriate 
risk-sensitive haircuts to collateral collected. 
This Prudential Standard also requires an APRA covered entity to apply risk 
mitigation practices in the areas of trading relationship documentation, trade 
confirmation, portfolio reconciliation, portfolio compression, valuation processes 
and dispute resolution processes. 
 
Authorised Version F2022L01578 registered 05/12/2022
January 2023 
CPS 226 - 2 
Table of Contents 
Authority ........................................................................................................... 3 
Application ....................................................................................................... 3 
Interpretation .................................................................................................... 4 
Definitions ........................................................................................................ 4 
Adjustments and exclusions............................................................................. 8 
Previous exercise of discretion ........................................................................ 8 
Assets in Australia ........................................................................................... 8 
Exchange of variation margin for non-centrally cleared derivatives ................. 8 
Post and collect of initial margin for non-centrally cleared derivatives ........... 10 
Minimum transfer amount .............................................................................. 12 
Due diligence ................................................................................................. 12 
Calculation of initial margin for non-centrally cleared derivatives ................... 12 
Model approach to initial margin for non-centrally cleared derivatives ........... 13 
Eligible collateral for margining ...................................................................... 15 
Collateral haircuts .......................................................................................... 16 
Treatment of intra-group transactions ............................................................ 17 
Cross border application of margin and risk mitigation requirements ............. 17 
Risk mitigation requirements for non-centrally cleared derivative 
transactions.................................................................................................... 19 
Trading relationship documentation ............................................................... 20 
Trade confirmation ......................................................................................... 20 
Portfolio reconciliation .................................................................................... 21 
Portfolio compression .................................................................................... 21 
Valuation processes ....................................................................................... 22 
Dispute resolution .......................................................................................... 22 
Attachment A — Standardised schedule for initial margin ............................. 23 
Attachment B — Standardised schedule of risk-sensitive haircuts ................ 25 
Attachment C — Credit rating grades ............................................................ 26 
Attachment D — Substituted compliance ....................................................... 27 
 
Authorised Version F2022L01578 registered 05/12/2022
January 2023 
CPS 226 - 3 
Authority 
1. 
This Prudential Standard is made under: 
(a) 
section 11AF of the Banking Act 1959 (Banking Act); 
(b) 
section 32 of the Insurance Act 1973 (Insurance Act); 
(c) 
section 230A of the Life Insurance Act 1995 (Life Insurance Act); and 
(d) 
section 34C of the Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993 
(SIS Act). 
Application 
2. 
This Prudential Standard applies to all:  
(a) 
authorised deposit-taking institutions (ADIs), including foreign ADIs, 
and non-operating holding companies authorised under the Banking Act 
(authorised banking NOHCs); 
(b) 
general insurers, including Category C insurers, non-operating 
holding companies authorised under the Insurance Act (authorised 
insurance NOHCs), and parent entities of Level 2 insurance groups;  
(c) 
life companies including friendly societies and eligible foreign life 
insurance companies (EFLICs), and non-operating holding companies 
registered under the Life Insurance Act (registered life NOHCs); and 
(d) 
RSE licensees under the SIS Act in respect of their business operations.1 
3. 
The requirements in this Prudential Standard apply in respect of each ‘APRA 
covered entity’, defined as: 
(a) 
an ADI, including a foreign ADI, and an authorised banking NOHC; 
(b) 
a general insurer, including a Category C insurer, an authorised insurance 
NOHC and a parent entity of a Level 2 insurance group; 
(c) 
a life company, including a friendly society and an EFLIC, and a 
registered life NOHC; and 
(d) 
a registrable superannuation entity under the SIS Act (RSE). 
4. 
A requirement imposed on an APRA covered entity that is also the Head of a 
Level 2 group is to be read as requiring that APRA covered entity to ensure that 
each member of the Level 2 group that is a covered counterparty complies with 
                                                 
1  
For the purposes of this Prudential Standard, an ‘RSE licensee’s business operations’ includes 
all activities as an RSE licensee (including the activities of each RSE of which it is the licensee), 
and all other activities of the RSE licensee to the extent that they are relevant to, or may impact 
on, its activities as an RSE licensee. 
Authorised Version F2022L01578 registered 05/12/2022
January 2023 
CPS 226 - 4 
the requirements of this Prudential Standard as if it were itself an APRA 
covered entity.2 
5. 
The requirements in this Prudential Standard apply to transactions which are 
booked in the accounts of an APRA covered entity. For a foreign ADI, Category 
C insurer or EFLIC, the requirements in this Prudential Standard apply only to 
transactions booked in accounts of the Australian branch of that entity. 
6. 
This Prudential Standard commences on 1 January 2023. 
Interpretation 
7. 
Terms that are defined in Prudential Standard APS 001 Definitions (APS 001), 
Prudential Standard GPS 001 Definitions (GPS 001) or Prudential Standard 
LPS 001 Definitions appear in bold the first time they are used in this Prudential 
Standard. 
8. 
Where this Prudential Standard provides for APRA to exercise a power or 
discretion, this power or discretion is to be exercised in writing. In this 
Prudential Standard, unless the contrary intention appears, a reference to an Act, 
Regulations, Prudential Standard or Australian Accounting Standard is a 
reference to the instrument as in force from time to time. 
Definitions 
9. 
The following definitions are used in this Prudential Standard: 
(a) 
aggregate month-end average notional amount — is the simple average of 
the total notional amount3 of outstanding non-centrally cleared derivative 
transactions as at the end of each month in the reference period. The total 
notional amount is the aggregate of all outstanding non-centrally cleared 
derivative transactions across all entities within the margining group. 
Intra-group transactions (transactions between two counterparties within 
the same margining group) are excluded from the calculation unless 
otherwise required by APRA; 
(b) 
asset class — for the purposes of this Prudential Standard, the asset 
classes are (1) currency/rates, (2) equity, (3) credit, and (4) commodities. 
The asset class ‘currency/rates’ includes currency, interest rate and 
inflation derivatives. The asset class ‘commodities’ includes gold, silver 
and platinum; 
(c) 
BCBS-IOSCO framework — is the margin requirements for non-centrally 
cleared derivatives as set out by the Basel Committee on Banking 
                                                 
2  
For the avoidance of doubt, a reference to an ‘APRA covered entity’ in this Prudential Standard 
is to be read, for the purposes of paragraph 4 of this Prudential Standard, as a reference to the 
entity and also all members of an APRA covered entity’s Level 2 group that are covered 
counterparties. 
3  
The calculation of the notional amounts must include physically settled foreign exchange 
forwards and swaps. 
Authorised Version F2022L01578 registered 05/12/2022
January 2023 
CPS 226 - 5 
Supervision (BCBS) and the Board of the International Organization of 
Securities Commissions (IOSCO) in Margin requirements for non-
centrally cleared derivatives as it exists at 23 July 2019; 
(d) 
central counterparty (CCP) — is a clearing house that interposes itself 
between counterparties to contracts traded in one or more financial 
markets, becoming the buyer to every seller and the seller to every buyer. 
A CCP becomes counterparty to trades with market participants through 
novation, an open offer system, or another legally binding arrangement; 
(e) 
covered bond special purpose vehicle — has the same meaning as in the 
Banking Act; 
(f) 
covered counterparty — is an entity that is a financial institution with the 
following exclusions: 
(i) 
sovereigns, central banks, multilateral development banks, public 
sector entities and the Bank for International Settlements; 
(ii) 
a covered bond special purpose vehicle that enters into derivative 
transactions for the sole purpose of hedging; 
(iii) a securitisation special purpose vehicle in a traditional securitisation 
that enters into derivative transactions for the sole purpose of 
hedging; and 
(iv) a special purpose vehicle or collective investment vehicle 
established for the sole purpose of acquiring and holding or 
investing in real estate or infrastructure assets, that enters into 
derivative transactions for the sole purpose of hedging; 
(g) 
derivative — is either of the following: 
(i) 
a derivative (within the meaning of Chapter 7 of the Corporations 
Act 2001); or 
(ii) 
an arrangement that is a forward, swap or option, or any 
combination of those things, in relation to one or more commodities; 
but does not include any arrangement that is of a kind mentioned in 
subregulation 6(2) of the Payment Systems and Netting Regulations 
2001;4 
(h) 
exchange traded derivative — is a derivative that is transacted directly 
through an organised, licensed and regulated exchange; 
                                                 
4  
Subregulation 6(2) of the Payment Systems and Netting Regulations 2001 identifies obligations 
that are not eligible obligations in relation to a close out netting contract. The arrangements 
mentioned include credit facilities, reciprocal purchase agreements (otherwise known as 
repurchase agreements), sell buyback arrangements, securities loan arrangements, contracts of 
insurance and managed investment schemes. 
Authorised Version F2022L01578 registered 05/12/2022
January 2023 
CPS 226 - 6 
(i) 
financial institution — includes, but is not limited to, any institution 
engaged substantively in one or more of the following activities 
(domestically or overseas) – banking; leasing; issuing credit cards; 
portfolio management5 (including asset management and funds 
management); management of securitisation schemes; equity and/or debt 
securities, futures and commodity trading and broking; custodial and 
safekeeping services; insurance and similar activities that are ancillary to 
the conduct of these activities. An authorised NOHC, a registered life 
NOHC, or any overseas equivalent is considered a financial institution. 
For the avoidance of doubt, hedge funds, trading firms, and foreign 
deposit-taking institutions are considered to be financial institutions;  
(j) 
Head of a Level 2 group — is each of the following: 
(i) 
where an ADI that is a member of a Level 2 group is not a 
subsidiary of an authorised banking NOHC or another ADI, that 
ADI; 
(ii) 
where an ADI that is a member of a Level 2 group is a subsidiary of 
an authorised banking NOHC, that authorised banking NOHC; 
(iii) the parent entity of a Level 2 insurance group as defined in GPS 
001; 
(k) 
initial margin — is collateral that is collected to cover the potential future 
exposure that could arise from future changes in the market value of a 
derivative over the close-out period in the event of a counterparty default; 
(l) 
IOSCO’s Risk Mitigation Standards — are the risk mitigation standards 
for non-centrally cleared over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives as set out by 
the Board of IOSCO in Risk Mitigation Standards for Non-centrally 
Cleared OTC Derivatives as it exists at 28 January 2015; 
(m) Level 2 group — means the entities that comprise: 
(i) 
Level 2 as defined in APS 001; or 
(ii) 
a Level 2 insurance group as defined in GPS 001; 
(n) 
margining group — is a group, comprising one or more entities, within the 
meaning of Australian Accounting Standard AASB 10 Consolidated 
Financial Statements; however, an APRA covered entity may elect to 
apply equivalent foreign accounting standards that apply to the 
consolidated financial statements of the APRA covered entity or covered 
counterparty, as relevant;  
(o) 
margining period — is the period of time during which margin must be 
exchanged for all new transactions entered into within that period (see 
Tables 1 and 2);  
                                                 
5 
For clarity, the definition does not apply where a portfolio manager is acting as an agent. 
Authorised Version F2022L01578 registered 05/12/2022
January 2023 
CPS 226 - 7 
(p) 
minimum transfer amount — is the amount specified in a margin 
agreement that sets the minimum amount of collateral required to be 
transferred between the two counterparties as part of a collateral call; 
(q) 
netting agreement — is an ‘eligible bilateral netting agreement’ within the 
meaning of Prudential Standard APS 112 Capital Adequacy: 
Standardised Approach to Credit Risk (APS 112), except that all 
references to ‘ADI’ are replaced with ‘APRA covered entity’; 
(r) 
non-centrally cleared derivative — is a derivative that is not cleared by a 
CCP. This does not include exchange traded derivatives, securities 
financing transactions and indirectly cleared derivatives that are 
intermediated through a clearing member on behalf of a non-member 
client where the client is subject to the margin requirements of the CCP, 
or where the client provides margin consistent with the CCP’s margin 
requirements; 
(s) 
qualifying level — is the level of aggregate month-end average notional 
amount for a reference period, in relation to the margining group of an 
APRA covered entity and the margining group of a covered counterparty, 
above which an APRA covered entity is subject to variation margin or 
initial margin requirements in the corresponding margining period (see 
Tables 1 and 2); 
(t) 
reference period — is the period of time in respect of which month-end 
totals must be used to calculate the aggregate month-end average notional 
amount (see Tables 1 and 2); 
(u) 
RSE — is a ‘registrable superannuation entity’ as defined in the SIS Act; 
(v) 
RSE licensee — has the same meaning as in the SIS Act; 
(w) securities financing transactions (SFTs) — are transactions such as 
repurchase agreements, reverse repurchase agreements, and securities 
lending and borrowing transactions where the value of the transactions 
depends on the market valuation of securities and the transactions are 
typically subject to margin agreements; 
(x) 
securitisation special purpose vehicle — a special purpose vehicle that 
purchases and holds, or otherwise holds directly in its name, the pool for 
the purpose of a securitisation. The special purpose vehicle’s acquisition 
of exposures held in the pool is typically funded by debt issued by the 
SPV, including through the issue of securities or units by the special 
purpose vehicle; 
(y) 
senior securitisation exposure — is a securitisation exposure effectively 
backed or secured by a first claim on the entire amount of the assets in the 
underlying pool. Securitisation exposures with different maturities that 
share pro rata loss allocation with senior securitisation exposures so that 
they benefit from the same level of credit enhancement, are themselves 
senior securitisation exposures;  
Authorised Version F2022L01578 registered 05/12/2022
January 2023 
CPS 226 - 8 
(z) 
threshold — is the amount specified in a margin agreement that defines 
the level of exposure above which margin will be posted. The threshold 
represents the amount of uncollateralised exposure allowed under the 
margin agreement; 
(aa) traditional securitisation — a securitisation where the pool is transferred 
(or assigned) to, and held by, or otherwise held directly in its name by, a 
special purpose vehicle; and 
(ab) variation margin — is collateral that is collected or paid to reflect the 
current mark-to-market exposure resulting from changes in the market 
value of a derivative. 
Adjustments and exclusions  
10. 
APRA may adjust or exclude a specific prudential requirement in this Prudential 
Standard in relation to one or more specified person referred to in paragraph 2 
of this Prudential Standard.6 
Previous exercise of discretion 
11. 
An APRA covered entity must contact APRA if it seeks to place reliance, for 
the purposes of complying with this Prudential Standard, on a previous 
exemption or other exercise of discretion by APRA under a previous version of 
this Prudential Standard.  
Assets in Australia 
12. 
For the purposes of paragraph 13A(4)(a) of the Banking Act and paragraph 
28(a) of the Insurance Act, cash or non-cash collateral given to secure any 
obligation under a non-centrally cleared derivative transaction is excluded from 
being assets in Australia. 
Exchange of variation margin for non-centrally cleared derivatives 
13. 
An APRA covered entity must exchange variation margin with a covered 
counterparty7 during a margining period in the third column of Table 1 where: 
(a) 
the APRA covered entity belongs to a margining group whose aggregate 
month-end average notional amount of non-centrally cleared derivatives 
for the relevant reference period in the first column of Table 1 exceeded 
the corresponding qualifying level in the second column of Table 1; and 
(b) 
the covered counterparty belongs to a margining group whose aggregate 
month-end average notional amount of non-centrally cleared derivatives 
                                                 
6  
Refer to subsection 11AF(2) of the Banking Act, subsection 32(3D) of the Insurance Act, 
subsection 230A(4) of the Life Insurance Act and subsection 34C(5) of the SIS Act. 
7  
Refer to paragraphs 59 to 63 of this Prudential Standard for the treatment of intra-group 
transactions. 
Authorised Version F2022L01578 registered 05/12/2022
January 2023 
CPS 226 - 9 
for the relevant reference period in the first column of Table 1 exceeded 
the corresponding qualifying level in the second column of Table 1. 
14. 
Variation margin must be exchanged for all new8 non-centrally cleared 
derivative transactions, with the exception of physically settled foreign 
exchange (FX) forwards and swaps,9,10 entered into during the relevant 
margining period in the third column of Table 1.  
 
Table 1: Implementation timetable for variation margin requirements 
Reference period 
Qualifying level 
Margining period 
March, April and May 
2016 
AUD 3 billion 
1 March 2017 to 
31 August 2017 
 
March, April and May 
2017 
AUD 3 billion 
1 September 2017 to 
31 August 2018 
March, April and May 
of each subsequent 
calendar year 
AUD 3 billion 
1 September of the year 
referred to in the first column 
of this row to 31 August of 
the next calendar year 
15. 
Where a non-centrally cleared derivative transaction is subject to variation 
margin requirements at inception, these requirements apply for the life of that 
transaction. 
16. 
Variation margin must be calculated and called on a daily basis. Settlement of 
variation margin amounts must be conducted promptly. 
17. 
Variation margin must be exchanged using a zero threshold so that the 
mark-to-market exposure of the non-centrally cleared derivative transactions is 
fully collateralised. In the event of a dispute, the undisputed amount must be 
exchanged between the two counterparties until the dispute is resolved. 
                                                 
8  
Genuine amendments to existing derivative transactions do not qualify as a new derivative 
transaction. This includes any amendments made solely for the purpose of addressing 
benchmark reforms. Any amendment that extends an existing derivative transaction for the 
purpose of avoiding margin requirements must be considered a new derivative transaction. The 
novation of a grandfathered transaction, application of standard trade maintenance processes on 
a grandfathered transaction or a transaction that results from portfolio compression of 
grandfathered transactions, does not qualify as a new derivative transaction. However, a 
transaction resulting from compression of both grandfathered transactions and transactions 
which are subject to mandatory margin requirements is subject to the margin requirements in 
this Prudential Standard. 
9  
For clarity, physically settled FX forwards and swaps must be included in the calculation of 
aggregate month-end average notional amount for the purposes of determining whether 
qualifying levels are exceeded, but may be excluded from the calculation of variation margin 
and initial margin to be exchanged. 
10  
For clarity, the fixed physically settled FX transactions associated with the exchange of 
principal in cross-currency swaps may also be excluded from the calculation of variation margin 
to be exchanged. All other risks associated with cross-currency swaps must be included in the 
calculation of variation margin to be exchanged. 
Authorised Version F2022L01578 registered 05/12/2022
January 2023 
CPS 226 - 10 
18. 
Transactions that are not subject to the same legally enforceable netting 
agreement must not be considered in the same variation margin calculation. 
Post and collect of initial margin for non-centrally cleared derivatives 
19. 
An APRA covered entity must post and collect initial margin with a covered 
counterparty11 during a margining period in the third column of Table 1 where: 
(a) 
the APRA covered entity belongs to a margining group whose aggregate 
month-end average notional amount of non-centrally cleared derivatives 
for the relevant reference period in the first column of Table 2 exceeded 
the corresponding qualifying level in the second column of Table 2; and 
(b) 
the covered counterparty belongs to a margining group whose aggregate 
month-end average notional amount of non-centrally cleared derivatives 
for the relevant reference period in the first column of Table 2 exceeded 
the corresponding qualifying level in the second column of Table 2. 
20. 
Initial margin must be posted and collected for all new12 non-centrally cleared 
derivative transactions, with the exception of physically settled FX forwards and 
swaps,13 entered into during the relevant margining period in the third column 
of Table 2.  
Table 2: Implementation timetable for initial margin requirements 
Reference period 
Qualifying level 
Margining period 
March, April and May 
2016 
AUD 4.5 trillion 
1 March 2017 to 
31 August 2017 
March, April and May 
2017 
AUD 3.375 trillion 
1 September 2017 to  
31 August 2018 
March, April and May 
2018 
AUD 2.25 trillion 
1 September 2018 to  
31 August 2019 
March, April and May 
2019 
AUD 1.125 trillion 
1 September 2019 to  
31 August 2021 
March, April and May 
2021 
AUD 75 billion 
1 September 2021 to  
31 August 2022 
March, April and May 
of each subsequent 
calendar year 
AUD 12 billion 
1 September of the year 
referred to in the first column 
of this row to 31 August of 
the next calendar year 
                                                 
11 
Refer to paragraphs 59 to 63 of this Prudential Standard for the treatment of intra-group 
transactions. 
12  
Refer to footnote 8. 
13  
Refer to footnote 9. 
Authorised Version F2022L01578 registered 05/12/2022
January 2023 
CPS 226 - 11 
21. 
Where a non-centrally cleared derivative transaction is subject to initial margin 
requirements at inception, these requirements apply for the life of that 
transaction. 
22. 
Initial margin must be posted and collected on a gross basis.  
23. 
Initial margin must be calculated and called both at the outset of a transaction 
and on a regular and consistent basis upon changes in the measured potential 
future exposure. Settlement of initial margin amounts must be conducted 
promptly. 
24. 
The threshold applicable to the initial margin for each margining group must not 
be greater than AUD 75 million.14 The threshold is applied bilaterally at the 
aggregate level of the margining group and is based on all non-centrally cleared 
derivative transactions between the two margining groups. In the event of a 
dispute, the undisputed amount must be posted and collected by the two 
counterparties until the dispute is resolved. 
25. 
For the purposes of applying the initial margin threshold in paragraph 24 of this 
Prudential Standard, an investment fund, RSE, trust or managed investment 
scheme (MIS) may be treated separately from both (i) the investment advisor, 
RSE licensee, trustee and/or responsible entity for that investment vehicle; and 
(ii) any other investment vehicle, as long as the fund, RSE, trust or MIS 
represents a segregated pool of assets that is not collateralised by or otherwise 
guaranteed or supported by other funds or an advisor in the event of insolvency 
or bankruptcy. 
26. 
The specific method and parameters that will be used by an APRA covered 
entity and a covered counterparty to calculate initial margin must be agreed and 
recorded at or prior to the onset of a transaction. 
27. 
Initial margin must be held so as to ensure that: 
(a) 
the margin collected is promptly available to the collecting party in the 
event of the posting party’s default; and  
(b) 
the collected margin must be subject to arrangements that protect the 
posting party to the extent possible under applicable law in the event that 
the collecting party enters insolvency or bankruptcy.  
28. 
Initial margin must not be re-hypothecated, re-pledged or re-used but cash initial 
margin may be held in a demand deposit account with a third-party custodian in 
the name of the posting counterparty. The third-party custodian must not be 
affiliated with either counterparty. Contractual arrangements providing for the 
posting and collection of initial margin must provide for initial margin to be 
held in a manner that satisfies this requirement. 
                                                 
14  
For the avoidance of doubt, an APRA covered entity is not required under this Prudential 
Standard to have initial margin documentation, custodial arrangements and operational 
processes in place for posting and collecting initial margin with a margining group if the 
bilateral initial margin amount is less than AUD 75 million. 
Authorised Version F2022L01578 registered 05/12/2022
January 2023 
CPS 226 - 12 
29. 
Initial margin collected must be segregated from the collector’s proprietary 
assets. The initial margin collector must also segregate initial margin provided 
in respect of one or more counterparties from the assets of other parties if 
requested by the relevant counterparty or counterparties.  
Minimum transfer amount 
30. 
The combined variation margin and initial margin amount required to be posted 
or collected under this Prudential Standard must be subject to a de minimis 
minimum transfer amount that must not exceed AUD 750,000. 
Due diligence 
31. 
An APRA covered entity must undertake a reasonable level of due diligence to 
assess: 
(a) 
whether a counterparty is a covered counterparty; and if so  
(b) 
whether, for variation margin requirements, the covered counterparty 
belongs to a margining group whose aggregate month-end average 
notional amount of non-centrally cleared derivatives for the relevant 
reference period in the first column of Table 1 exceeded the corresponding 
qualifying level in the second column of Table 1; and 
(c) 
whether, for initial margin requirements, the covered counterparty belongs 
to a margining group whose aggregate month-end average notional 
amount of non-centrally cleared derivatives for the relevant reference 
period in the first column of Table 2 exceeded the corresponding 
qualifying level in the second column of Table 2. 
A self-declaration or public disclosure from a counterparty is an acceptable way 
to verify that the counterparty is a covered counterparty whose non-centrally 
cleared derivatives activity exceeded the applicable variation margin and initial 
margin qualifying levels. Where an APRA covered entity is of the preliminary 
view that a counterparty is not a covered counterparty or did not exceed the 
applicable qualifying levels, the APRA covered entity is required to undertake a 
reasonable level of due diligence to ensure that there is no reason to believe 
otherwise. 
Calculation of initial margin for non-centrally cleared derivatives 
32. 
The required amount of initial margin posted and collected must be calculated 
by either a model approach approved by APRA or the standardised schedule set 
out in Attachment A to this Prudential Standard.  
33. 
Derivative transactions for which an APRA covered entity faces no counterparty 
risk require no initial margin to be collected and may be excluded from the 
initial margin calculation under both a model approach and the standardised 
schedule. 
34. 
The calculation of initial margin for cross-currency swaps differs depending on 
whether a model approach or the standardised schedule is adopted: 
Authorised Version F2022L01578 registered 05/12/2022
January 2023 
CPS 226 - 13 
(a) 
If a model approach is adopted, then the model does not need to 
incorporate the risk associated with the fixed physically settled FX 
transactions associated with the exchange of principal. All other risks of 
the cross-currency swap must be considered in the calculation.15 
(b) 
If the standardised schedule is adopted, then the initial margin only needs 
to be calculated with reference to the relevant row in the interest rates 
section of the standardised schedule outlined in Attachment A to this 
Prudential Standard. 
Model approach to initial margin for non-centrally cleared derivatives 
35. 
An APRA covered entity may apply to APRA for approval to use a model for 
the calculation of initial margin for some or all of its portfolio. An APRA 
covered entity need not restrict itself to a model approach or the standardised 
schedule for its whole portfolio. APRA may approve an application made under 
this paragraph. 
36. 
The initial margin calculated by the model approach must be sufficiently 
conservative even during periods of low market volatility. Calculation of the 
initial margin amount must be consistent with at least a one-tailed 99 per cent 
confidence interval over a 10-day time horizon,16 based on historical data that 
includes a period of significant financial stress and does not exceed an historical 
period of five years. The historical data must be equally weighted for calibration 
purposes. 
37. 
The period of financial stress used for calibration must be identified and applied 
separately for each asset class.  
38. 
Transactions that are not subject to the same legally enforceable netting 
agreement must not be considered in the same initial margin model calculation. 
39. 
A model may allow for diversification, hedging and risk offsets within an asset 
class provided these transactions are covered by the same legally enforceable 
netting agreement. Any such allowance requires approval by APRA as part of 
an initial margin model approval. 
40. 
Initial margin calculations by a model for derivatives in distinct asset classes 
must be performed without regard to derivatives in other asset classes. That is, 
initial margin amounts calculated for each asset class must not account for 
                                                 
15  
For avoidance of doubt, the only payments that may be excluded from initial margin 
requirements for a cross-currency swap are the fixed physically settled FX transactions 
associated with the exchange of principal. All other payments or cash flows that occur during 
the life of the swap must be subject to initial margin requirements. 
16  
The 10-day requirement applies in the case that variation margin is exchanged on a daily basis. 
If variation margin is exchanged at less than daily frequency, the minimum time horizon must 
be set equal to 10 days plus the number of days in between variation margin exchanges. 
Authorised Version F2022L01578 registered 05/12/2022
January 2023 
CPS 226 - 14 
diversification benefits across asset classes17 and must be summed to calculate 
the initial margin amount for a netting agreement.  
41. 
A model used for initial margin calculations must be subject to an independent 
internal governance process that: 
(a) 
continuously monitors and assesses the value of the model’s risk 
assessments; 
(b) 
tests the model against realised data and experience; 
(c) 
validates the applicability of the model to the derivatives for which it is 
used;  
(d) 
regularly reviews the model in line with developments in global industry 
standards for initial margin models; and 
(e) 
accounts for the complexity of the products covered. 
42. 
An APRA covered entity must ensure that an independent review of the initial 
margin model and risk measurement system is carried out initially (i.e. at the 
time when model approval is sought) and then regularly as part of the internal 
audit process. This review must be conducted by functionally independent, 
appropriately trained and competent personnel, and must take place at least once 
every three years or when a material change is made to the model or the risk 
measurement system.  
43. 
Once an APRA covered entity has obtained approval to use a model for the 
calculation of initial margin for an asset class, it must continue to employ that 
model for that asset class on an ongoing basis unless, or except to the extent 
that, the model approval is varied, revoked or suspended by APRA. 
44. 
APRA may, at any time, vary, revoke or suspend a model approval for the 
calculation of initial margin, or impose additional conditions on a model 
approval. 
45. 
Where a model approval has been varied, revoked or suspended, APRA may 
require an APRA covered entity to revert to the standardised schedule for the 
calculation of initial margin. 
46. 
Prior notification to APRA is required for any material changes to an initial 
margin model or risk measurement system. APRA’s prior written approval is 
required for any material changes to an initial margin model which are not 
consistent with global industry standards for initial margin models.  
                                                 
17  
This applies to all products including those which have risk exposures in multiple asset classes 
(e.g. quantos). 
Authorised Version F2022L01578 registered 05/12/2022
January 2023 
CPS 226 - 15 
Eligible collateral for margining 
47. 
Subject to the conditions set out in this Prudential Standard, an APRA covered 
entity must collect margin only in the following forms of eligible collateral and, 
where relevant, credit rating grades must be determined in accordance with 
Attachment C to this Prudential Standard:18 
(a) 
cash collateral; 
(b) 
debt securities rated by an External Credit Assessment Institution 
(ECAI) with a credit rating grade of either three (or better) for securities 
issued by: Commonwealth, State and Territory governments in Australia 
(including State and Territory central borrowing authorities); central, state 
and regional governments in other countries; the Reserve Bank of 
Australia; central banks in other countries; and the international banking 
agencies and multilateral development banks; 
(c) 
debt securities rated by an ECAI with a credit rating grade of either three 
(or better) for securities issued by: ADIs, overseas banks, Australian and 
international local governments and corporates; 
(d) 
debt securities not rated by an ECAI where these securities are issued by 
an ADI or overseas bank as senior debt and are listed on a recognised 
exchange. This is subject to the condition that all rated issues of the same 
seniority by the issuing ADI or overseas bank have a long-term or short-
term credit rating grade of at least three and the APRA covered entity 
holding the security has no information suggesting that the security 
justifies a rating below this level; 
(e) 
covered bonds rated by an ECAI with a credit rating grade of either three 
(or better); 
(f) 
senior securitisation exposures rated by an ECAI with a credit rating grade 
of one; 
(g) 
equities included in a major stock index; and 
(h) 
gold bullion. 
48. 
Resecuritisation exposures, irrespective of credit ratings, are not eligible 
collateral for margining purposes. 
49. 
Collateral in the form of securities issued by a counterparty to the transaction 
(or by any person or entity related or associated with the counterparty) is 
considered to have a material positive correlation with the credit quality of the 
counterparty and is therefore not eligible collateral for margining purposes. 
                                                 
18  
For the avoidance of doubt, eligible collateral for margining purposes is distinct from the 
eligible collateral under APS 112 that can be used to reduce the credit risk capital requirement. 
Authorised Version F2022L01578 registered 05/12/2022
January 2023 
CPS 226 - 16 
50. 
An APRA covered entity must have appropriate controls in place to ensure that 
the collateral collected does not exhibit significant wrong-way risk19 or 
significant concentration risk. The controls must consider concentrations in 
terms of an individual issuer, issuer type and asset type. 
51. 
Eligible collateral that was originally posted or collected may be substituted 
provided that: 
(a) 
both parties agree to the substitution;  
(b) 
the substitution is made on the terms applicable to their agreement; and  
(c) 
the substituted eligible collateral meets all the requirements of this 
Prudential Standard and the value of the substituted eligible collateral, 
after the application of risk-sensitive haircuts, is sufficient to meet the 
margin requirement. 
Collateral haircuts 
52. 
Risk-sensitive haircuts appropriately reflecting the credit, market and FX risk 
must be applied to the collected collateral. The risk-sensitive haircuts must be 
calculated using either a model approach approved by APRA or the 
standardised schedule set out in Attachment B to this Prudential Standard. 
53. 
APRA may, upon written request by an APRA covered entity, approve the use 
of a model approach for the calculation of risk-sensitive haircuts.20 The model 
used must be subject to appropriate internal governance standards. 
54. 
For the model approach, an APRA covered entity must ensure that an 
independent review of the risk-sensitive haircut model and risk measurement 
system is carried out initially (i.e. at the time when model approval is sought) 
and then regularly as part of the internal audit process. This review must be 
conducted by functionally independent, appropriately trained and competent 
personnel, and must take place at least once every three years or when a 
material change is made to the model or the risk measurement system.  
55. 
An APRA covered entity must consistently adopt either the standardised 
schedule or a model approach for the calculation of risk-sensitive haircuts for all 
of the collateral within the same collateral class.21 Once an APRA covered 
                                                 
19  
Wrong-way risk occurs when the value of the collateral collected exhibits a significant 
correlation with the creditworthiness of the counterparty or the value of the underlying non-
centrally cleared derivatives portfolio in a way that undermines the effectiveness of the 
protection offered by the collateral collected. 
20  
For clarity, while an APRA covered entity may have approval to use a model to calculate 
haircuts on collateral for the purpose of calculating regulatory capital, a separate approval by 
APRA is required for the use of a model in calculating haircuts for margining collateral. 
21  
Classes of collateral must be consistent with the categories in Table 4 of Attachment B to this 
Prudential Standard and include (1) cash; (2) debt securities under paragraph 47(b) of this 
Prudential Standard; (3) debt securities under paragraphs 47(c), 47(d), 47(e) and 47(f) of this 
Prudential Standard; (4) equities; and (5) gold. Foreign exchange haircuts must be modelled 
consistently for all collateral classes. 
Authorised Version F2022L01578 registered 05/12/2022
January 2023 
CPS 226 - 17 
entity has obtained approval to use a model for the calculation of risk-sensitive 
haircuts for a collateral class, it must continue to employ that model for that 
collateral class on an ongoing basis unless, or except to the extent that, the 
model approval is varied, revoked or suspended. 
56. 
APRA may, at any time, vary, revoke or suspend a model approval for the 
calculation of risk-sensitive haircuts, or impose additional conditions on a 
model approval. 
57. 
Where a model approval has been varied, revoked or suspended, APRA may 
require an APRA covered entity to revert to the standardised schedule for the 
calculation of risk-sensitive haircuts. 
58. 
APRA’s prior written approval is required for any material changes to a risk-
sensitive haircut model.  
Treatment of intra-group transactions 
59. 
An APRA covered entity is not subject to the initial margin requirements in this 
Prudential Standard for a non-centrally cleared derivative transaction with a 
covered counterparty that is a member of the APRA covered entity’s margining 
group. 
60. 
The variation margin requirements in this Prudential Standard do not apply to a 
non-centrally cleared derivative transaction between an APRA covered entity 
that is a foreign ADI, Category C insurer or EFLIC and a covered counterparty 
that is a member of the APRA covered entity’s margining group. 
61. 
An APRA covered entity is not subject to the variation margin requirements in 
this Prudential Standard for a non-centrally cleared derivative transaction with a 
covered counterparty that is a member of the APRA covered entity’s margining 
group where that covered counterparty is also a member of the APRA covered 
entity’s Level 2 group.22 
62. 
APRA may, upon written request by an APRA covered entity, exclude one or 
more intra-group transactions from the variation margin requirements applicable 
to the entity under this Prudential Standard.  
63. 
APRA may require an APRA covered entity to exchange variation margin 
and/or post and collect initial margin with any other entity within the APRA 
covered entity’s margining group where APRA deems appropriate to do so. 
Cross border application of margin and risk mitigation requirements 
64. 
Attachment D to this Prudential Standard sets out the margin requirements or 
provisions of a foreign jurisdiction that are comparable in outcomes with the 
                                                 
22  
For a life company or a friendly society, non-centrally cleared derivative transactions between 
any of its funds (e.g. statutory fund, benefit fund, management fund or shareholder fund) are not 
in the same Level 2 group and are therefore subject to the variation margin requirements. 
Authorised Version F2022L01578 registered 05/12/2022
January 2023 
CPS 226 - 18 
BCBS-IOSCO framework and the margin requirements in this Prudential 
Standard.23 
65. 
Subject to paragraph 66 of this Prudential Standard, the margin requirements in 
this Prudential Standard do not apply to transactions in which an APRA covered 
entity complies with the relevant foreign margin requirements or provisions in 
Attachment D to this Prudential Standard in their entirety (substituted 
compliance).24 
66. 
An APRA covered entity may only substitute compliance with the margin 
requirements or provisions (in their entirety) of a foreign jurisdiction for 
compliance with the margin requirements in this Prudential Standard in a 
transaction where: 
(a) 
the APRA covered entity is transacting with a covered counterparty that is 
required to exchange margins in respect of the trading relationship 
between the APRA covered entity and the covered counterparty under the 
margin requirements or provisions of the relevant foreign jurisdiction, or 
that would be required to exchange margins in respect of that trading 
relationship under those requirements or provisions if its amount of non-
centrally cleared derivatives exceeded a level specified in those 
requirements or provisions; or 
(b) 
the APRA covered entity is required to exchange margins in respect of 
that trading relationship under the margin requirements or provisions of 
the relevant foreign jurisdiction.  
67. 
Where a foreign ADI, Category C insurer or EFLIC is directly subject to: 
(a) 
margin requirements that are substantially similar to the BCBS-IOSCO 
framework by its home jurisdiction; or 
(b) 
risk mitigation requirements that are substantially similar to IOSCO’s 
Risk Mitigation Standards by its home jurisdiction,  
it may comply in their entirety with its home jurisdiction’s margin or risk 
mitigation requirements (as the case may be) or those of a jurisdiction deemed 
equivalent by its home jurisdiction in lieu of complying with the relevant 
requirements in this Prudential Standard where the APRA covered entity has 
completed an internal assessment that positively demonstrates: (i) how it is 
directly subject to requirements of the foreign jurisdiction; (ii) how the 
requirements of the foreign jurisdiction are substantially similar to the BCBS-
IOSCO framework or IOSCO’s Risk Mitigation Standards (as the case may be); 
and (iii) how it complies with those requirements. The APRA covered entity’s 
                                                 
23  
For the avoidance of doubt, all requirements in this Prudential Standard are margin requirements 
except for the risk mitigation requirements in paragraphs 73 to 95 of this Prudential Standard. 
24  
For the avoidance of doubt, this includes an APRA covered entity to which subparagraph 66(a) 
of this Prudential Standard applies and the entity would be compliant with the foreign margin 
requirements or provisions in their entirety if the entity were directly subject to the requirements 
or provisions. 
Authorised Version F2022L01578 registered 05/12/2022
January 2023 
CPS 226 - 19 
internal assessment, and any additional requested information, must be made 
available to APRA upon request. 
68. 
Where a member of an APRA covered entity’s Level 2 group that is 
incorporated outside of Australia is directly subject to: 
(a) 
margin requirements of a foreign jurisdiction that are substantially similar 
to the BCBS-IOSCO framework; or 
(b) 
risk mitigation requirements of a foreign jurisdiction that are substantially 
similar to IOSCO’s Risk Mitigation Standards, 
the APRA covered entity may apply for approval by APRA to comply, in 
respect of that member, with the foreign jurisdiction’s requirements in lieu of 
complying with the relevant requirements in this Prudential Standard.  
69. 
An APRA covered entity is not required to post or collect initial margin where 
either it or its counterparty to the transaction is incorporated, and operating, in a 
legal jurisdiction that does not permit it or its counterparty to satisfy the 
requirements in paragraph 27 of this Prudential Standard in relation to that 
transaction. 
70. 
An APRA covered entity is not required to exchange variation margin or post or 
collect initial margin if there is any doubt as to the enforceability of the netting 
agreement upon insolvency or bankruptcy of the counterparty. An APRA 
covered entity must monitor such exposures and set appropriate internal limits 
and controls to manage its exposure to such counterparties. 
71. 
An APRA covered entity is not required to exchange variation margin or post or 
collect initial margin where collateral arrangements are questionable or not 
legally enforceable upon default of the counterparty. An APRA covered entity 
must monitor such exposures and set appropriate internal limits and controls to 
manage its exposure to such counterparties.  
72. 
Applicable netting agreements and collateral arrangements must be supported 
by regularly updated legal opinions consistent with the requirements set out in 
Attachment H of APS 112. 
Risk mitigation requirements for non-centrally cleared derivative 
transactions 
73. 
An APRA covered entity that transacts in non-centrally cleared derivatives must 
establish and implement policies and procedures for risk mitigation standards 
for non-centrally cleared derivative transactions with all of its counterparties 
(including counterparties that are in the same margining group). Subject to the 
requirements in paragraph 74 of this Prudential Standard, these policies and 
procedures may consider the nature of the risks and transaction type, as well as 
size, complexity, and operating environment of both the APRA covered entity 
and its counterparty in establishing an appropriate framework.  
Authorised Version F2022L01578 registered 05/12/2022
January 2023 
CPS 226 - 20 
74. 
An APRA covered entity entering into a non-centrally cleared derivative 
transaction with a covered counterparty must, at a minimum, apply the risk 
mitigation standards outlined in paragraphs 75 to 95 of this Prudential Standard. 
Trading relationship documentation 
75. 
An APRA covered entity must establish and implement policies and procedures 
to execute written trading relationship documentation25 with a covered 
counterparty prior to or contemporaneously with executing a non-centrally 
cleared derivative transaction. 
76. 
The trading relationship documentation must:  
(a) 
promote legal certainty for non-centrally cleared derivative transactions;  
(b) 
include all material rights and obligations of the counterparties concerning 
the non-centrally cleared derivative trading relationship that have been 
agreed between them; and  
(c) 
be executed in writing or through equivalent non-rewritable, non-erasable 
electronic means.  
77. 
An APRA covered entity must have policies and procedures to maintain trading 
relationship documentation for a reasonable period of time after the maturity of 
any outstanding transactions with a covered counterparty and such 
documentation must be made available to APRA upon request. 
Trade confirmation 
78. 
An APRA covered entity must establish and implement policies and procedures 
designed to ensure the material terms of all non-centrally cleared derivative 
transactions26 with a covered counterparty are confirmed as soon as practicable 
after execution of the transaction. Material terms must include terms necessary 
to promote legal certainty to the transaction including incorporating by 
reference the trading relationship documentation.  
79. 
An APRA covered entity must establish and implement policies and procedures 
designed to confirm material changes to the legal terms or the rights and 
obligations under transactions. 
80. 
Confirmations must be executed in writing through non-rewritable, non-erasable 
automated methods where it is reasonably practicable for the relevant 
counterparties to the transaction to do so. In all other cases, confirmation must 
be executed in writing via non-rewritable, non-erasable electronic or manual 
means. 
                                                 
25  
A long form confirmation that meets the conditions in paragraph 76 of this Prudential Standard 
and is received as soon as practicable after the execution of a transaction is considered to satisfy 
the requirement for trading relationship documentation. 
26  
This requirement applies to all transactions including transactions entered into from novation. 
Authorised Version F2022L01578 registered 05/12/2022
January 2023 
CPS 226 - 21 
Portfolio reconciliation 
81. 
An APRA covered entity must establish and implement policies and procedures 
designed to ensure that the material terms and valuations of all transactions in a 
non-centrally cleared derivatives portfolio are reconciled with covered 
counterparties at regular intervals.  
82. 
The policies and procedures must be designed to ensure the process or method 
of portfolio reconciliation is agreed upon with its counterparties and designed 
to: 
(a) 
ensure an accurate record of material terms and valuations of the non-
centrally cleared derivatives transactions in the portfolio; and 
(b) 
identify and resolve discrepancies in the material terms and valuations in a 
timely manner. 
83. 
An APRA covered entity must conduct portfolio reconciliation with a scope and 
frequency that reflects: 
(a) 
the nature and extent of its non-centrally cleared derivative activity; 
(b) 
the materiality and complexity of the risks it faces; 
(c) 
global regulatory standards imposed on similar institutions for similar 
transactions; and 
(d) 
market practice and industry protocols in the relevant derivative markets. 
Portfolio compression 
84. 
An APRA covered entity must establish and implement policies and procedures 
to regularly assess and, to the extent appropriate, conduct portfolio compression. 
85. 
On either a bilateral or multilateral basis, portfolio compression must seek to 
replace economically-equivalent transactions by decreasing the number of 
transactions and/or the notional value of a portfolio. 
86. 
An APRA covered entity must conduct portfolio compression with a scope and 
frequency that reflects: 
(a) 
the nature and extent of its non-centrally cleared derivative activity; 
(b) 
the materiality and complexity of the risks it faces; 
(c) 
global regulatory standards imposed on similar institutions for similar 
transactions; and 
(d) 
market practice and industry protocols in the relevant derivative markets. 
Authorised Version F2022L01578 registered 05/12/2022
January 2023 
CPS 226 - 22 
Valuation processes 
87. 
An APRA covered entity must agree with its covered counterparties and clearly 
document the process for determining the value of each non-centrally cleared 
derivative transaction at any time from the execution of the transaction to the 
termination, maturity, or expiration thereof, for the purpose of exchanging 
margin. Valuation processes must be reasonably designed to minimise the 
likelihood of disputes. 
88. 
All agreements on valuation process must be documented in the trading 
relationship documentation or trade confirmation. 
89. 
Valuation determinations must be based on economically similar transactions or 
other objective criteria. Documentation must include an alternative process or 
approach by which counterparties will determine the value of the non-centrally 
cleared derivative transaction in the event of the unavailability or other failure 
of any inputs required to value the transaction. 
90. 
An APRA covered entity must perform periodic review of the agreed upon 
valuation process to take into account changes in market conditions. An APRA 
covered entity must establish and implement policies and procedures for 
updating any such changes as a result of a review.  
Dispute resolution 
91. 
An APRA covered entity must establish and implement policies and procedures 
designed to ensure rigorous and robust dispute resolution procedures are agreed 
with its covered counterparties prior to or contemporaneously with executing a 
non-centrally cleared derivative transaction. The dispute resolution procedures 
must address the mechanism or process for determining when discrepancies in 
material terms or valuations should be considered disputes as well as how such 
disputes should be resolved as soon as practicable.  
92. 
The dispute resolution mechanism or process must include the escalation of 
material disputes to senior management. The dispute resolution mechanism or 
process must include escalation to the Board where the dispute is considered 
material to the APRA covered entity.  
93. 
An APRA covered entity must have policies and procedures to document 
disputes and such documentation must be made available to APRA upon 
request. 
94. 
In the event that a margin dispute arises, an APRA covered entity must make all 
necessary and appropriate efforts, including timely initiation of dispute 
resolution protocols, to resolve the dispute with its counterparty and exchange 
the required amount of margin in a timely manner. 
95. 
An APRA covered entity must notify APRA of disputes that are material either 
in dollar value or period of time outstanding. An APRA covered entity must 
clearly document and regularly review the criteria used to determine when a 
dispute 
is 
reported 
to 
APRA.
Authorised Version F2022L01578 registered 05/12/2022
January 2023 
CPS 226 – Attachment A - 23 
Attachment A — Standardised schedule for initial 
margin 
1. 
Initial margin calculated according to the standardised schedule equals the sum 
of the ‘net standardised initial margin amount’ calculated separately for each 
netting agreement. 
2. 
APRA may, upon the request of an APRA covered entity, approve the entity to 
calculate the ‘net standardised initial margin amount’ using a schedule already 
in use for regulatory capital purposes prior to the application of this Prudential 
Standard, provided that such a schedule is at least as conservative as that 
outlined below.  
3. 
For each particular netting agreement:  
(a) 
Net standardised initial margin amount = 0.4 x gross standardised initial 
margin amount + 0.6 x net-to-gross ratio x gross standardised initial 
margin amount. The net-to-gross ratio (NGR) is the ratio of the net current 
credit exposure (NCCE) of all transactions included in a netting 
agreement to the gross current credit exposure (GCCE) of the same 
transactions. That is, NGR = NCCE/GCCE. 
(b) 
NCCE is the sum of all positive and negative mark-to-market values of all 
individual contracts covered by a netting agreement (i.e. positive mark-to-
market values of transactions may be offset against negative mark-to-
market values on other transactions covered by the same netting 
agreement). If the net sum of individual mark-to-market values is positive, 
the NCCE is equal to that sum. If the sum of mark-to-market values is 
zero or negative, the NCCE is set equal to zero. 
(c) 
GCCE is the sum of the mark-to-market values of all transactions covered 
by a netting agreement with a positive mark to-market value with no 
offsetting against contracts with a negative mark-to-market value.  
(d) 
The ‘gross standardised initial margin amount’ is the sum over all 
derivative contracts in the netting agreement of the gross notional size of 
each derivative contract multiplied by the relevant initial margin rate 
provided in the standardised schedule in Table 3. Simple netting of 
notional amounts where contracts are matched by the same underlying and 
maturity is allowed.27  
 
 
                                                 
27  
For example, a pay-fixed AUD interest rate swap with maturity of three years and notional of 
AUD 100 million could be netted against a pay-floating AUD interest rate swap with maturity 
of three years and notional of AUD 50 million to arrive at a single notional of AUD 50 million 
to which the appropriate initial margin rate would be applied. Derivatives with different 
fundamental characteristics such as the underlying, maturity etc. may not be netted against each 
other. 
Authorised Version F2022L01578 registered 05/12/2022
January 2023 
CPS 226 – Attachment A - 24 
Table 3: Standardised schedule of initial margin rates  
Asset class 
Initial margin rate 
(% of notional 
amount) 
Credit: Duration less than 2 years 
2% 
Credit: Duration from 2 years to less than 5 years 
5% 
Credit: Duration 5 years or longer 
10% 
Commodity 
15% 
Equity 
15% 
Foreign exchange 
6% 
Interest rate: Duration less than 2 years 
1% 
Interest rate: Duration from 2 years to less than 5 
years 
2% 
Interest rate: Duration 5 years or longer 
4% 
Other 
15% 
Authorised Version F2022L01578 registered 05/12/2022
January 2023 
CPS 226 – Attachment B - 25 
Attachment B — Standardised schedule of risk-
sensitive haircuts 
1. 
The risk-sensitive haircut percentage under the standardised schedule is 
calculated as the sum of the collateral class haircut percentage in Table 4 and 
the FX haircut percentage outlined in paragraphs 3 and 4 of this Attachment.  
2. 
APRA may, upon the request of an APRA covered entity, approve the entity to 
calculate the risk-sensitive haircut using a schedule already in use for regulatory 
capital purposes prior to the application of this Prudential Standard. Such a 
schedule must be at least as conservative as that outlined below. 
3. 
For the purposes of variation margin, an additional FX haircut of eight per cent 
of market value applies to all non-cash collateral in which the currency of the 
collateral asset differs from the currency agreed in an individual derivative 
contract, the relevant governing master netting agreement or the relevant credit 
support annex. 
4. 
For the purposes of initial margin, an additional FX haircut of eight per cent of 
market value applies to all cash and non-cash collateral in which the currency of 
the collateral asset differs from the termination currency. Each counterparty 
may specify only one termination currency. 
Table 4: Standardised schedule of risk-sensitive haircuts 
Collateral class 
Residual maturity 
Haircut (% of market 
value) 
Cash 
 
0% 
Debt securities under 
paragraph 47(b) of this 
Prudential Standard 
≤1 year 
0.5% 
>1 year, ≤5 years 
2% 
>5 years 
4% 
Debt securities under 
paragraphs 47(c), 47(d), 
47(e) and 47(f) of this 
Prudential Standard 
≤1 year 
1% 
>1 year, ≤5 years 
4% 
>5 years 
8% 
Equities included in a 
major stock index 
 
15% 
Gold 
 
15% 
 
 
Authorised Version F2022L01578 registered 05/12/2022
January 2023 
CPS 226 – Attachment C - 26 
Attachment C — Credit rating grades 
1. 
For the purposes of this Prudential Standard, an APRA covered entity must use 
the credit rating grades in Table 5 and Table 6 below. 
Table 5: Recognised long-term ratings and equivalent credit rating grades 
Credit rating 
grade 
Standard & 
Poor’s 
Corporation 
Moody’s 
Investors 
Services 
Fitch Ratings 
1 
AAA 
AA+ 
AA 
AA- 
Aaa 
Aa1 
Aa2 
Aa3 
AAA 
AA+ 
AA 
AA- 
2 
A+ 
A 
A- 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A+ 
A 
A- 
3 
BBB+ 
BBB 
BBB- 
Baa1 
Baa2 
Baa3 
BBB+ 
BBB 
BBB- 
Table 6: Recognised short-term ratings and equivalent credit rating grades 
Credit rating 
grade 
Standard & 
Poor’s 
Corporation 
Moody’s 
Investors 
Services 
Fitch Ratings 
1 
A-1 
P-1 
F-1 
2 
A-2 
P-2 
F-2 
3 
A-3 
P-3 
F-3 
Authorised Version F2022L01578 registered 05/12/2022
January 2023 
CPS 226 – Attachment D - 27 
Attachment D — Substituted compliance 
1. 
For the purposes of this Prudential Standard and subject to the condition in 
paragraph 2 of this Attachment, substituted compliance with the margin 
requirements or provisions issued or administered by any of the following 
foreign bodies is permitted: 
(a) 
Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions, Canada; 
(b) 
European Commission; 
(c) 
Hong Kong Monetary Authority, Hong Kong; 
(d) 
Financial Services Agency, Japan; 
(e) 
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, Japan;  
(f) 
Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, Japan; 
(g) 
Monetary Authority of Singapore, Singapore; 
(h) 
Swiss Financial Market Supervisory Authority, Switzerland; 
(i) 
Financial Conduct Authority, United Kingdom; 
(j) 
Prudential Regulation Authority, United Kingdom; 
(k) 
Commodity Futures Trading Commission, United States; 
(l) 
Farm Credit Administration, United States; 
(m) Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, United States; 
(n) 
Federal Housing Finance Agency, United States; 
(o) 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, United States; and 
(p) 
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Treasury, United States. 
2. 
The following condition applies in relation to the foreign margin requirements 
or provisions issued or administered by a foreign body set out in paragraphs 1(a) 
to (j) of this Attachment: 
(a) 
Substituted compliance is not permitted for a transaction where the APRA 
covered entity and the covered counterparty are both members of the same 
margining group. 
Authorised Version F2022L01578 registered 05/12/2022


--- End of file: CPS 226 Margining and risk mitigation for non-c.txt ---

 
Banking, Insurance, Life Insurance, Health 
Insurance and Superannuation (prudential 
standard) determination No. 2 of 2023  
Prudential Standard CPS 230 Operational Risk Management  
Banking Act 1959 
Insurance Act 1973 
Life Insurance Act 1995 
Private Health Insurance (Prudential Supervision) Act 2015 
Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993 
I, John Lonsdale, a delegate of APRA: 
(a) 
under subsections 11AF(3) of the Banking Act, 32(4) of the Insurance Act, and 
230A(5) of the Life Insurance Act, REVOKE Banking, Insurance and Life 
Insurance (prudential standard) determination No. 6 of 2016 including 
Prudential Standard CPS 231 Outsourcing made under that determination; 
(b) 
under subsections 11AF(3) of the Banking Act, 32(4) of the Insurance Act, and 
230A(5) of the Life Insurance Act, REVOKE Banking, Insurance and Life 
Insurance (prudential standard) determination No. 7 of 2016 including 
Prudential Standard CPS 232 Business Continuity Management made under 
that determination; 
(c) 
under subsection 92(5) of the PHIPS Act, REVOKE Health Insurance 
(prudential standard) determination No. 4 of 2015, including Prudential 
Standard HPS 231 Outsourcing made under that determination;  
(d) 
under subsection 34C(6) of the SIS Act, REVOKE Superannuation (prudential 
standard) determination No. 3 of 2012 including, Prudential Standard SPS 231 
Outsourcing made under that determination, and Superannuation (prudential 
standard) determination No. 4 of 2012 including Prudential Standard SPS 232 
Business Continuity Management made under that determination;  
(e) 
under subsection 11AF(1) of the Banking Act, DETERMINE the prudential 
standard which applies to all ADIs and authorised banking NOHCs; 
(f) 
under subsection 32(1) of the Insurance Act, DETERMINE the prudential 
standard which applies to all general insurers and authorised insurance 
NOHCs and subsidiaries of general insurers and authorised insurance NOHCs; 
Authorised Version F2023L01242 registered 14/09/2023
 
 
 
 
  
(g) 
under subsection 230A(1) of the Life Insurance Act, DETERMINE the 
prudential standard which applies to all life companies, including friendly 
societies, and registered NOHCs; 
(h) 
under subsection 92(1) of the PHIPS Act, DETERMINE the prudential standard 
which applies to all private health insurers; and 
(i) 
under subsection 34C(1) of the SIS Act, DETERMINE the prudential standard 
which applies to all RSE licensees. 
This instrument commences on 1 July 2025. 
 
Date: 11 September 2023 
 
 
 
John Lonsdale  
Chair 
APRA 
Interpretation 
In this Determination: 
ADI has the meaning given in section 5 of the Banking Act. 
APRA means the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority. 
authorised banking NOHC has the meaning given to the expression authorised 
NOHC in section 5 of the Banking Act. 
authorised insurance NOHC has the meaning given to the expression authorised 
NOHC in subsection 3(1) of the Insurance Act. 
friendly society has the meaning given in section 16C of the Life Insurance Act. 
general insurer has the meaning given in section 11 of the Insurance Act. 
life company has the meaning given in the Schedule to the Life Insurance Act. 
private health insurer has the meaning given in section 4 of the PHIPS Act. 
registered NOHC has the meaning given in the Schedule to the Life Insurance Act. 
RSE licensee has the meaning given in subsection 10(1) of the SIS Act. 
the Banking Act means the Banking Act 1959. 
the Insurance Act means the Insurance Act 1973. 
the Life Insurance Act means the Life Insurance Act 1995. 
the PHIPS Act means the Private Health Insurance (Prudential Supervision) Act 
2015. 
the prudential standard means Prudential Standard CPS 230 Operational Risk 
Management in the form set out in the Schedule. 
the SIS Act means the Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993. 
 
Authorised Version F2023L01242 registered 14/09/2023
 
 
 
 
  
Schedule  
Prudential Standard CPS 230 Operational Risk Management comprises the 
document commencing on the following page. 
Authorised Version F2023L01242 registered 14/09/2023
 
 
 
July 2025 
CPS 230 – 1 
  
 
Prudential Standard CPS 230 
Operational Risk Management 
Objectives and key requirements of this Prudential 
Standard 
The aim of this Prudential Standard is to ensure that an APRA-regulated entity is 
resilient to operational risks and disruptions. An APRA-regulated entity must 
effectively manage its operational risks, maintain its critical operations through 
disruptions, and manage the risks arising from service providers. 
An APRA-regulated entity’s approach to operational risk must be appropriate to its 
size, business mix and complexity. The key requirements of this Prudential Standard 
are that an APRA-regulated entity must: 
  
identify, assess and manage its operational risks, with effective internal controls, 
monitoring and remediation; 
  
be able to continue to deliver its critical operations within tolerance levels 
through severe disruptions, with a credible business continuity plan (BCP); and 
  
effectively manage the risks associated with service providers, with a 
comprehensive service provider management policy, formal agreements and 
robust monitoring. 
 
Authorised Version F2023L01242 registered 14/09/2023
 
 
 
July 2025 
CPS 230 – 2 
  
Authority 
1. 
This Prudential Standard is made under: 
 
section 11AF of the Banking Act 1959 (Banking Act); 
(a)
 
section 32 of the Insurance Act 1973 (Insurance Act);  
(b)
 
section 230A of the Life Insurance Act 1995 (Life Insurance Act); 
(c)
 
section 92 of the Private Health Insurance (Prudential Supervision) Act 
(d)
2015 (PHIPS Act); and 
 
section 34C of the Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993 
(e)
(SIS Act). 
Application and commencement 
2. 
This Prudential Standard applies to all APRA-regulated entities defined as: 
 
authorised deposit-taking institutions (ADIs), including foreign ADIs, 
(a)
and non-operating holding companies authorised under the Banking Act 
(authorised banking NOHCs); 
 
general insurers, including Category C insurers, non-operating holding 
(b)
companies authorised under the Insurance Act (authorised insurance 
NOHCs) and parent entities of Level 2 insurance groups; 
 
life companies, including friendly societies, eligible foreign life 
(c)
insurance companies (EFLICs) and registered NOHCs; 
 
private health insurers registered under the PHIPS Act; and 
(d)
 
registrable superannuation entity licensees (RSE licensees) under the SIS 
(e)
Act in respect of their business operations.1 
3. 
The obligations imposed by this Prudential Standard on, or in relation to, a 
foreign ADI, a Category C insurer and an EFLIC apply only in relation to the 
Australian branch operations of that entity. 
4. 
Where an APRA-regulated entity is the Head of a group,2 it must comply with a 
requirement of this Prudential Standard: 
 
in its capacity as an APRA-regulated entity; 
(a)
                                                 
1  
RSE licensee has the meaning given in subsection 10(1) of the SIS Act. For the purposes of this 
Prudential Standard, an RSE licensee’s business operations includes all activities of an RSE 
licensee, including the activities of each RSE of which it is the licensee, and all other activities 
of the RSE licensee to the extent that they are relevant to, or may impact on, its activities as an 
RSE licensee. 
2   
Where a Level 2 group operates within a Level 3 group, a requirement expressed as applying to 
a Head of a group is to be read as applying to the Level 3 Head. 
Authorised Version F2023L01242 registered 14/09/2023
 
 
 
July 2025 
CPS 230 – 3 
  
 
by ensuring that the requirement is applied appropriately throughout the 
(b)
group,3 including in relation to entities that are not APRA-regulated; and 
 
on a group basis. 
(c)
5. 
In applying the requirements of this Prudential Standard on a group basis, 
references to an APRA-regulated entity are to be read as ‘Head of a group’ and 
references to entity are to be read as ‘group’. 
6. 
This Prudential Standard commences on 1 July 2025. 
7. 
Where an APRA-regulated entity has pre-existing contractual arrangements in 
place with a service provider, the requirements in this Prudential Standard will 
apply in relation to those arrangements from the earlier of the next renewal date 
of the contract with the service provider or 1 July 2026. 
Interpretation 
8. 
Terms that are defined in Prudential Standard APS 001 Definitions, Prudential 
Standard GPS 001 Definitions, Prudential Standard LPS 001 Definitions, 
Prudential Standard HPS 001 Definitions or Prudential Standard 3PS 001 
Definitions appear in bold the first time they are used in this Prudential 
Standard. 
9. 
In this Prudential Standard, unless the contrary intention appears, a reference to 
an Act, Regulation or Prudential Standard is a reference to the Act, Regulation 
or Prudential Standard as in force from time to time. 
10. 
Where this Prudential Standard provides for APRA to exercise a power or 
discretion, the power or discretion is to be exercised in writing. 
Adjustments and exclusions 
11. 
APRA may adjust or exclude a specific prudential requirement in this Prudential 
Standard in relation to an APRA-regulated entity.4 
                                                 
3  
Group means a Level 2 group, Level 3 group or a group comprising the RSE licensee and all 
connected entities (as defined in subsection 10(1) of the SIS Act) and all related bodies 
corporate (with the meaning given in section 50 of the Corporations Act 2001) of the RSE 
licensee, as relevant. Level 2 group means the entities that comprise Level 2 (for ADIs) or Level 
2 insurance groups (for general insurers). For the avoidance of doubt, group includes a group as 
defined in APS 001 and, for an RSE licensee, where the RSE licensee is part of a corporate 
group. 
4  
Refer to subsection 11AF(2) of the Banking Act, subsection 32(3D) of the Insurance Act, 
subsection 230A(4) of the Life Insurance Act, subsection 92(4) of the PHIPS Act and subsection 
34C(5) of the SIS Act. 
Authorised Version F2023L01242 registered 14/09/2023
 
 
 
July 2025 
CPS 230 – 4 
  
Key principles 
12. 
An APRA-regulated entity must: 
 
effectively manage its operational risks, and set and maintain appropriate 
(a)
standards for conduct and compliance; 
 
maintain its critical operations within tolerance levels through severe 
(b)
disruptions; and 
 
manage the risks associated with the use of service providers. 
(c)
13. 
An APRA-regulated entity must identify, assess and manage operational risks 
that may result from inadequate or failed internal processes or systems, the 
actions or inactions of people or external drivers and events. Operational risk is 
inherent in all products, activities, processes and systems. 
14. 
An APRA-regulated entity must, to the extent practicable, prevent disruption to 
critical operations, adapt processes and systems to continue to operate within 
tolerance levels in the event of a disruption and return to normal operations 
promptly once a disruption is over. 
15. 
An APRA-regulated entity must not rely on a service provider unless it can 
ensure that in doing so it can continue to meet its prudential obligations in full 
and effectively manage the associated risks. 
Risk management framework 
16. 
As part of its risk management framework required under Prudential Standard 
CPS 220 Risk Management (CPS 220) and Prudential Standard SPS 220 Risk 
Management (SPS 220), an APRA-regulated entity must develop and maintain: 
 
governance arrangements for the oversight of operational risk; 
(a)
 
an assessment of its operational risk profile, with a defined risk appetite 
(b)
supported by indicators, limits and tolerance levels; 
 
internal controls that are designed and operating effectively for the 
(c)
management of operational risks; 
 
appropriate monitoring, analysis and reporting of operational risks and 
(d)
escalation processes for operational incidents and events; 
 
business continuity plan(s) (BCPs) that set out how the entity would 
(e)
identify, manage and respond to a disruption within tolerance levels and 
are regularly tested with severe but plausible scenarios; and 
 
processes for the management of service provider arrangements. 
(f)
17. 
As part of the required reviews of the risk management framework under 
CPS 220 and SPS 220, an APRA-regulated entity must review its operational 
Authorised Version F2023L01242 registered 14/09/2023
 
 
 
July 2025 
CPS 230 – 5 
  
risk management.5 The reviews must cover those aspects of operational risk 
management set out in paragraph 16. 
18. 
Operational risk management must be integrated into an APRA-regulated 
entity’s overall risk management framework and processes. Business continuity 
planning must be consistent with, and not conflict or undermine, an APRA-
regulated entity’s recovery and exit planning.6 
19. 
Where APRA considers that an APRA-regulated entity’s operational risk 
management has material weaknesses, APRA may: 
 
require an independent review of the entity’s operational risk 
(a)
management; 
 
require the entity to develop a remediation program; 
(b)
 
require the entity to hold additional capital, as relevant;7 
(c)
 
impose conditions on the entity’s licence; and 
(d)
 
take other actions required in the supervision of this Prudential Standard. 
(e)
Roles and responsibilities 
20. 
The Board of an APRA-regulated entity is ultimately accountable for oversight 
of an entity’s operational risk management. This includes business continuity 
and the management of service provider arrangements.8 
21. 
The Board must ensure that the APRA-regulated entity sets clear roles and 
responsibilities for senior managers9 for operational risk management, 
including business continuity and the management of service provider 
arrangements. 
22. 
The Board must: 
 
oversee operational risk management and the effectiveness of key internal 
(a)
controls in maintaining the entity’s operational risk profile within risk 
appetite. The Board must be provided with regular updates on the APRA-
                                                 
5  
Refer to CPS 220 and SPS 220 for the requirement to undertake a review of the risk 
management framework. 
6  
Refer to Prudential Standard CPS 190 Recovery and Exit Planning. 
7  
For an RSE licensee, APRA may require an RSE licensee to meet an ORFR target amount 
determined by APRA under Prudential Standard SPS 114 Operational Risk Financial 
Requirement. 
8  
For an RSE licensee, a reference to the Board is to be read as a reference to the Board of 
directors or group of individual trustees of an RSE licensee, as applicable. ‘Group of individual 
trustees’ has the meaning given in subsection 10(1) of the SIS Act. A reference to the Board in 
the case of a foreign ADI is a reference to the senior officer outside Australia. 
9  
Senior manager in relation to life insurers has the meaning given in the Life Insurance Act, `and 
in relation to RSE licensees has the meaning given in Prudential Standard SPS 520 Fit and 
Proper. 
Authorised Version F2023L01242 registered 14/09/2023
 
 
 
July 2025 
CPS 230 – 6 
  
regulated entity’s operational risk profile and ensure senior management 
takes action as required to address any areas of concern; 
 
approve the BCP and tolerance levels for disruptions to critical operations, 
(b)
review the results of testing and oversee the execution of any findings; 
and 
 
approve the service provider management policy, and review risk and 
(c)
performance reporting on material service providers. 
23. 
Senior management of an APRA-regulated entity must provide clear and 
comprehensive information to the Board on the expected impacts on the entity’s 
critical operations when the Board is making decisions that could affect the 
resilience of critical operations. 
Operational risk management 
24. 
An APRA-regulated entity must manage its full range of operational risks, 
including but not limited to legal risk, regulatory risk, compliance risk, conduct 
risk, technology risk, data risk and change management risk. Senior 
management are responsible for operational risk management across the end-to-
end process for all business operations. 
25. 
An APRA-regulated entity must maintain appropriate and sound information 
and information technology (IT) capability to meet its current and projected 
business requirements and to support its critical operations and risk 
management. In managing technology risks, an APRA-regulated entity must 
monitor the age and health of its information assets and meet the requirements 
for information security in Prudential Standard CPS 234 Information Security 
(CPS 234). 
Operational risk profile and assessment 
26. 
An APRA-regulated entity must assess the impact of its business and strategic 
decisions on its operational risk profile and operational resilience, as part of its 
business and strategic planning processes.10 This must include an assessment of 
the impact of new products, services, geographies and technologies on its 
operational risk profile. 
27. 
An APRA-regulated entity must maintain a comprehensive assessment of its 
operational risk profile. As part of this, an APRA-regulated entity must: 
 
maintain appropriate and effective information systems to monitor 
(a)
operational risk, compile and analyse operational risk data and facilitate 
reporting to the Board and senior management; 
                                                 
10  
Refer to Prudential Standard SPS 515 Strategic Planning and Member Outcomes for 
requirements applying to an RSE licensee with respect to strategic objectives and business 
planning. 
Authorised Version F2023L01242 registered 14/09/2023
 
 
 
July 2025 
CPS 230 – 7 
  
 
identify and document the processes and resources needed to deliver 
(b)
critical operations, including people, technology, information, facilities 
and service providers, the interdependencies across them, and the 
associated risks, obligations, key data and controls; and 
 
undertake scenario analysis to identify and assess the potential impact of 
(c)
severe operational risk events, test its operational resilience and identify 
the need for new or amended controls and other mitigation strategies. 
28. 
An APRA-regulated entity must conduct a comprehensive risk assessment 
before providing a material service to another party, to ensure that the APRA-
regulated entity is able to continue to meet its prudential obligations after 
entering into the arrangement. APRA may require an APRA-regulated entity to 
review and strengthen internal controls or processes where APRA considers 
there to be heightened prudential risks in such circumstances. 
Operational risk controls 
29. 
An APRA-regulated entity must design, implement and embed internal controls 
to mitigate its operational risks in line with its risk appetite and meet its 
compliance obligations. 
30. 
An APRA-regulated entity must regularly monitor, review and test controls for 
design and operating effectiveness, the frequency of which must be 
commensurate with the materiality of the risks being controlled. The results of 
testing must be reported to senior management and any gaps or deficiencies in 
the control environment must be rectified in a timely manner. 
31. 
An APRA-regulated entity must remediate material weaknesses in its 
operational risk management, including control gaps, weaknesses and failures. 
This remediation must be supported by clear accountabilities and assurance and 
address the root causes of weaknesses in a timely manner. An APRA-regulated 
entity must include identified control gaps, weaknesses and failures in its 
operational risk profile until such matters are remediated. 
Operational risk incidents 
32. 
An APRA-regulated entity must ensure that operational risk incidents and near 
misses are identified, escalated, recorded and addressed in a timely manner. An 
APRA-regulated entity must take incidents and near misses into account in its 
assessment of its operational risk profile and control effectiveness in a timely 
manner. 
33. 
An APRA-regulated entity must notify APRA as soon as possible, and not later 
than 72 hours, after becoming aware of an operational risk incident that it 
determines to be likely to have a material financial impact or a material impact 
on the ability of the entity to maintain its critical operations.11 
                                                 
11  
A notification of an information security incident reported under CPS 234 does not need to be 
separately reported under the notification requirements of this Prudential Standard. 
Authorised Version F2023L01242 registered 14/09/2023
 
 
 
July 2025 
CPS 230 – 8 
  
Business continuity 
34. 
An APRA-regulated entity must: 
(a) 
define, identify and maintain a register of its critical operations; 
(b) 
take reasonable steps to minimise the likelihood and impact of disruptions 
to its critical operations; 
(c) 
maintain a credible BCP that sets out how it would maintain its critical 
operations within tolerance levels through disruptions, including disaster 
recovery planning for critical information assets;12 
(d) 
activate its BCP if needed in the event of a disruption; and 
(e) 
return to normal operations promptly after a disruption is over. 
Critical operations and tolerance levels 
35. 
Critical operations are processes undertaken by an APRA-regulated entity or its 
service provider which, if disrupted beyond tolerance levels, would have a 
material adverse impact on its depositors, policyholders, beneficiaries or other 
customers, or its role in the financial system. 
36. 
An APRA-regulated entity must, at a minimum, classify the following business 
operations as critical operations, unless it can justify otherwise: 
(a) 
for an ADI: payments, deposit-taking and management, custody, 
settlements and clearing; 
(b) 
for an insurer (general, life, private health): claims processing; 
(c) 
for an RSE licensee: investment management and fund administration; 
and 
(d) 
for all APRA-regulated entities: customer enquiries and the systems and 
infrastructure needed to support critical operations. 
37. 
APRA may require an APRA-regulated entity, or a class of APRA-regulated 
entities, to classify a business operation as a critical operation. 
38. 
For each critical operation, an APRA-regulated entity must establish tolerance 
levels for: 
(a) 
the maximum period of time the entity would tolerate a disruption to the 
operation; 
                                                 
12  
An entity may have a number of BCPs. A BCP may include separate crisis management plans 
and disaster recovery plans. 
Authorised Version F2023L01242 registered 14/09/2023
 
 
 
July 2025 
CPS 230 – 9 
  
(b) 
the maximum extent of data loss the entity would accept as a result of a 
disruption; and 
(c) 
minimum service levels the entity would maintain while operating under 
alternative arrangements during a disruption. 
39. 
APRA may require an APRA-regulated entity to review and change its 
tolerance levels for a critical operation. APRA may set tolerance levels for an 
APRA-regulated entity, or a class of APRA-regulated entities, where it 
identifies a heightened risk or material weakness. 
Business continuity plan 
40. 
An APRA-regulated entity’s BCP must include: 
(a) 
the register of critical operations and associated tolerance levels; 
(b) 
triggers to identify a disruption and prompt activation of the plan, and 
arrangements to direct resources in the event of activation; 
(c) 
actions it would take to maintain its critical operations within tolerance 
levels through disruptions; 
(d) 
an assessment of the execution risks, required resources, preparatory 
measures, including key internal and external dependencies needed to 
support the effective implementation of the BCP actions; and 
(e) 
a communications strategy to support execution of the plan. 
41. 
An APRA-regulated entity must maintain the capabilities required to execute 
the BCP, including access to people, resources and technology.13 An APRA-
regulated entity must monitor compliance with its tolerance levels and report 
any failure to meet tolerance levels, together with a remediation plan, to the 
Board. 
42. 
An APRA-regulated entity must notify APRA as soon as possible, and not later 
than 24 hours after, if it has suffered a disruption to a critical operation  outside 
tolerance. The notification must cover the nature of the disruption, the action 
taken, the likely impact on the entity’s business operations and the timeframe 
for returning to normal operations. 
Testing and review 
43. 
An APRA-regulated entity must have a systematic testing program for its BCP 
that covers all critical operations and includes an annual business continuity 
                                                 
13  
Capabilities required to execute the BCP may be maintained within the APRA-regulated entity 
or via an agreement with another party. For the avoidance of doubt, such agreements with other 
parties must meet the requirements for management of service providers arrangements in this 
Prudential Standard. 
Authorised Version F2023L01242 registered 14/09/2023
 
 
 
July 2025 
CPS 230 – 10 
  
exercise. The program must test the effectiveness of the entity’s BCP and its 
ability to meet tolerance levels in a range of severe but plausible scenarios. 
44. 
The testing program must be tailored to the material risks of the APRA-
regulated entity and include a range of severe but plausible scenarios, including 
disruptions to services provided by material service providers and scenarios 
where contingency arrangements are required. APRA may require the inclusion 
of an APRA-determined scenario in a business continuity exercise for an 
APRA-regulated entity, or a class of APRA-regulated entities. 
45. 
An APRA-regulated entity must update, as necessary, its BCP on an annual 
basis to reflect any changes in legal or organisational structure, business mix, 
strategy or risk profile or for shortcomings identified as a result of the review 
and testing of the BCP. 
46. 
An APRA-regulated entity’s internal audit function must periodically review the 
entity’s BCP and provide assurance to the Board that the BCP sets out a 
credible plan for how the entity would maintain its critical operations within 
tolerance levels through severe disruptions and that testing procedures are 
adequate and have been conducted satisfactorily. 
Management of service provider arrangements 
47. 
An APRA-regulated entity must maintain a comprehensive service provider 
management policy. The policy must cover how the entity will identify material 
service providers and manage service provider arrangements, including the 
management of material risks associated with the arrangements. 
48. 
The policy must include: 
 
the entity’s approach to entering into, monitoring, substituting and exiting 
(a)
agreements with material service providers; 
 
the entity’s approach to managing the risks associated with material 
(b)
service providers; and 
 
the entity’s approach to managing the risks associated with any fourth 
(c)
parties that material service providers rely on to deliver a critical operation 
to the APRA-regulated entity.14 
Material service providers 
49. 
An APRA-regulated entity must identify and maintain a register of its material 
service providers and manage the material risks associated with using these 
providers. Material service providers are those on which the entity relies to 
                                                 
14  
A fourth party is a party that a service provider relies on in delivering services to an APRA-
regulated entity. 
Authorised Version F2023L01242 registered 14/09/2023
 
 
 
July 2025 
CPS 230 – 11 
  
undertake a critical operation or that expose it to material operational risk.15 
Material arrangements are those on which the entity relies to undertake a critical 
operation or that expose it to material operational risk. 
50. 
An APRA-regulated entity must, at a minimum, classify a provider of the 
following services as a material service provider, unless it can justify otherwise: 
 
for an ADI: credit assessment, funding and liquidity management and 
(a)
mortgage brokerage; 
 
for an insurer (general, life, private health): underwriting, claims 
(b)
management, insurance brokerage and reinsurance; 
 
for an RSE licensee: fund administration, custodial services, investment 
(c)
management and arrangements with promoters and financial planners; and 
 
for all APRA-regulated entities: risk management, core technology 
(d)
services and internal audit. 
51. 
An APRA-regulated entity must submit its register of material service providers 
to APRA on an annual basis. 
52. 
APRA may require an APRA-regulated entity, or a class of APRA-regulated 
entities, to classify a service provider, type of service provider or service 
provider arrangement as material. 
Service provider agreements 
53. 
Before entering into or materially modifying a material arrangement, an APRA-
regulated entity must: 
 
undertake appropriate due diligence, including an appropriate selection 
(a)
process and an assessment of the ability of the service provider to provide 
the service on an ongoing basis; and 
 
assess the financial and non-financial risks from reliance on the service 
(b)
provider, including risks associated with geographic location or 
concentration of the service provider(s) or parties the service provider 
relies on in providing the service. 
54. 
For all material arrangements, an APRA-regulated entity must maintain a 
formal legally binding agreement (formal agreement). The formal agreement 
must, at a minimum: 
(a) 
specify the services covered by the agreement and associated service 
levels; 
                                                 
15   
A material service provider may be a third party, related party or connected entity. A service 
provider may be identified as material as a result of an individual arrangement or multiple 
arrangements with an APRA-regulated entity. 
Authorised Version F2023L01242 registered 14/09/2023
 
 
 
July 2025 
CPS 230 – 12 
  
(b) 
set out the rights, responsibilities and expectations of each party to the 
agreement, including in relation to the ownership of assets, ownership and 
control of data, dispute resolution, audit access, liability and indemnity; 
(c) 
include provisions to ensure the ability of the entity to meet its legal and 
compliance obligations; 
(d) 
require notification by the service provider of its use of other material 
service providers that it materially relies upon in providing the service to 
the APRA-regulated entity through sub-contracting or other arrangements; 
(e) 
require the liability for any failure on the part of any sub-contractor to be 
the responsibility of the service provider; 
(f) 
include a force majeure provision indicating those parts of the contract 
that would continue in the case of a force majeure event; and 
(g) 
termination provisions including, but not limited to, the right to terminate 
both the arrangement in its entirety or parts of the arrangement. For an 
RSE licensee, termination provisions must include the ability for the RSE 
licensee to terminate the arrangement where to continue the arrangement 
would be inconsistent with the RSE licensee’s duty to act in the best 
financial interests of beneficiaries (refer to subsection 52(2)(c) of the SIS 
Act). 
55. 
The formal agreement must also include provisions that: 
(a) 
allow APRA access to documentation, data and any other information 
related to the provision of the service; 
(b) 
allow APRA the right to conduct an on-site visit to the service provider; 
and 
(c) 
ensure the service provider agrees not to impede APRA in fulfilling its 
duties as prudential regulator. 
56. 
For each material arrangement an APRA-regulated entity must: 
 
identify and manage risks that could affect the ability of the service 
(a)
provider to provide the service on an ongoing basis; 
 
identify and manage risks to the APRA-regulated entity that could result 
(b)
from the arrangement, such as step-in risk or contagion risk; 
 
ensure it can execute its BCP if needed; and 
(c)
 
ensure it can conduct an orderly exit from the arrangement if needed. 
(d)
57. 
APRA may require an APRA-regulated entity to review and make changes to a 
service provider arrangement where it identifies heightened prudential concerns. 
Authorised Version F2023L01242 registered 14/09/2023
 
 
 
July 2025 
CPS 230 – 13 
  
Monitoring, notifications and review 
58. 
An APRA-regulated entity must monitor and ensure that senior management 
receive reporting on material arrangements commensurate with the nature and 
usage of the service. This monitoring must include a regular assessment of: 
(a) 
performance under the service agreement with reference to agreed service 
levels; 
(b) 
the effectiveness of controls to manage the risks associated with the use of 
the service provider; and 
(c) 
compliance of both parties with the service provider agreement. 
59. 
An APRA-regulated entity must notify APRA: 
(a) 
as soon as possible and not more than 20 business days after entering into 
or materially changing an agreement for the provision of a service on 
which the entity relies to undertake a critical operation; and 
(b) 
prior to entering into any material offshoring arrangement,16 or when there 
is a significant change proposed to the arrangement, including in 
circumstances where data or personnel relevant to the service being 
provided will be located offshore. 
60. 
An APRA-regulated entity’s internal audit function must review any proposed 
material arrangement involving the outsourcing of a critical operation. The 
internal audit function must regularly report to the Board or Board Audit 
Committee on compliance of such arrangements with the entity’s service 
provider management policy. 
 
                                                 
16  
Material offshoring arrangement means a material arrangement where the service provided is 
undertaken outside Australia. Offshoring includes arrangements where the service provider is 
incorporated in Australia, but the physical location of the service being provided is undertaken 
outside Australia. Offshoring does not include arrangements where the physical location of a 
service is performed within Australia, but the service provider is not incorporated in Australia. 
Authorised Version F2023L01242 registered 14/09/2023


--- End of file: CPS 230 Operational Risk Management.txt ---

 
 
 
 
Banking, Insurance and Life Insurance (prudential 
standard) determination No. 6 of 2016  
Prudential Standard CPS 231 Outsourcing 
Banking Act 1959 
Insurance Act 1973 
Life Insurance Act 1995 
 
I, Wayne Byres, delegate of APRA: 
 
(a) 
under subsection 11AF(3) of the Banking Act 1959 REVOKE Banking, 
Insurance and Life Insurance (prudential standard) determination No. 1 of 2014, 
including Prudential Standard CPS 231 Outsourcing made under that 
Determination, to the extent that it applied to all ADIs and authorised banking 
NOHCs; 
 
(b) 
under subsection 32(4) of the Insurance Act 1973 REVOKE Banking, Insurance 
and Life Insurance (prudential standard) determination No. 1 of 2014, including 
Prudential Standard CPS 231 Outsourcing made under that Determination, to 
the extent that it applied to all general insurers, authorised insurance NOHCs, 
and subsidiaries of general insurers and authorised insurance NOHCs; 
 
(c) 
under subsection 230A(5) of the Life Insurance Act 1995 REVOKE Banking, 
Insurance and Life Insurance (prudential standard) determination No. 1 of 2014, 
including Prudential Standard CPS 231 Outsourcing made under that 
Determination, to the extent that it applied to life companies, friendly societies, 
registered life NOHCs, and subsidiaries of life companies and registered life 
NOHCs; 
 
(d) 
under subsection 11AF(1) of the Banking Act 1959 DETERMINE Prudential 
Standard CPS 231 Outsourcing in the form set out in the Schedule, to the extent 
that it applies to all ADIs and authorised banking NOHCs;  
 
(e) 
under subsection 32(1) of the Insurance Act 1973 DETERMINE Prudential 
Standard CPS 231 Outsourcing in the form set out in the Schedule, to the extent 
Authorised Version F2016L01436 registered 14/09/2016
 
 
 
that it applies to all general insurers, authorised insurance NOHCs, and 
subsidiaries of general insurers and authorised insurance NOHCs; and 
 
(f) 
under subsection 230A(1) of the Life Insurance Act 1995 DETERMINE 
Prudential Standard CPS 231 Outsourcing in the form set out in the Schedule, 
to the extent that it applies to all life companies, friendly societies, registered 
life NOHCs, and subsidiaries of life companies and registered life NOHCs.  
 
This instrument commences on 1 July 2017 
 
 
Dated: 8 September 2016  
 
[Signed] 
 
Wayne Byres 
Chairman 
Interpretation 
In this Determination: 
ADI has the meaning given in section 5 of the Banking Act 1959. 
APRA means the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority. 
authorised banking NOHC has the meaning given to the expression authorised 
NOHC in section 5 of the Banking Act 1959. 
authorised insurance NOHC has the meaning given to the expression authorised 
NOHC in subsection 3(1) of the Insurance Act 1973. 
friendly society has the meaning given in section 16C of the Life Insurance Act 1995. 
general insurer has the meaning given in section 11 of the Insurance Act 1973. 
life company has the meaning given in the Schedule to the Life Insurance Act 1995. 
registered life NOHC has the meaning given to the expression registered NOHC in 
the Schedule to the Life Insurance Act 1995. 
 
Schedule  
 
Prudential Standard CPS 231 Outsourcing comprises the 12 pages commencing on 
the following page.  
 
Authorised Version F2016L01436 registered 14/09/2016
 
July 2017 
 
CPS 231 - 1 
 
Prudential Standard CPS 231 
Outsourcing 
Objectives and key requirements of this Prudential 
Standard 
This Prudential Standard requires that all outsourcing arrangements involving 
material business activities entered into by an APRA-regulated institution and a 
Head of a group be subject to appropriate due diligence, approval and ongoing 
monitoring. All risks arising from outsourcing material business activities must be 
appropriately managed to ensure that the APRA-regulated institution, or the group 
it heads, is able to meet its financial and service obligations to its depositors and/or 
policyholders. 
The Board of an APRA-regulated institution and the Board of a Head of a group, 
respectively, have ultimate responsibility for the outsourcing policy of the 
institution or group. 
The key requirements of this Prudential Standard are that an APRA-regulated 
institution and a Head of a group must: 
 
maintain a policy, approved by the Board, relating to outsourcing of material 
business activities; 
 
have sufficient monitoring processes in place to manage the outsourcing of 
material business activities; 
 
for all outsourcing of material business activities with third parties, have a 
legally binding agreement in place, unless otherwise agreed by APRA; 
 
consult with APRA prior to entering into agreements to outsource material 
business activities to service providers that conduct their activities outside 
Australia; and 
 
notify APRA after entering into agreements to outsource material business 
activities. 
Where an APRA-regulated institution is the Head of a group, this Prudential 
Standard requires that any outsourcing arrangements involving material business 
activities entered into by members of the group must be subject to appropriate due 
Authorised Version F2016L01436 registered 14/09/2016
 
July 2017 
 
CPS 231 - 2 
diligence, approval and ongoing monitoring, and the provisions of this Prudential 
Standard are applied appropriately throughout the group, including in relation to 
institutions that are not APRA-regulated. In addition, where specified, the Head of a 
group must comply with the requirements on a group basis. 
Authorised Version F2016L01436 registered 14/09/2016
 
July 2017 
 
CPS 231 - 3 
Authority 
 
This Prudential Standard is made under:  
1.
 
section 11AF of the Banking Act 1959 (Banking Act); 
(a)
 
section 32 of the Insurance Act 1973 (Insurance Act); and 
(b)
 
section 230A of the Life Insurance Act 1995 (Life Insurance Act). 
(c)
Application 
 
This Prudential Standard applies to all ‘APRA-regulated institutions’,1 defined 
2.
as:  
 
all authorised deposit-taking institutions (ADIs), including foreign 
(a)
ADIs, and non-operating holding companies authorised under the 
Banking Act (authorised banking NOHCs); 
 
all general insurers, including Category C insurers, non-operating 
(b)
holding companies authorised under the Insurance Act (authorised 
insurance NOHCs) and parent entities of Level 2 insurance groups; and 
 
all life companies, including friendly societies and eligible foreign life 
(c)
insurance companies (EFLICs), and non-operating holding companies 
registered under the Life Insurance Act (registered life NOHCs.) 
 
All APRA-regulated institutions have to comply with this Prudential Standard 
3.
in its entirety, unless otherwise expressly indicated. The obligations imposed by 
this Prudential Standard on, or in relation to, a foreign ADI, a Category C 
insurer or an EFLIC apply only in relation to the Australian branch operations 
of that institution. 
 
Where an APRA-regulated institution is the ‘Head of a group’,2 it must comply 
4.
with a requirement of this Prudential Standard: 
 
in its capacity as an APRA-regulated institution;  
(a)
 
by ensuring that the requirement is applied appropriately throughout the 
(b)
group, including in relation to institutions that are not APRA-regulated; 
and 
 
on a group basis. 
(c)
In applying the requirements of this Prudential Standard on a group basis, 
references in paragraphs 20 to 46 to an ‘APRA-regulated institution’ should be 
                                                 
1 
Note, for the purposes of this Prudential Standard, an RSE licensee is not treated as an ‘APRA-
regulated institution’. Refer to Prudential Standard SPS 231 Outsourcing (SPS 231) for 
requirements relating to the outsourcing arrangements of an RSE licensee. 
2 
Where a Level 2 group operates within a Level 3 group, a requirement expressed as applying to 
a Head of a group is to be read as applying to the Level 3 Head. 
Authorised Version F2016L01436 registered 14/09/2016
 
July 2017 
 
CPS 231 - 4 
read as ‘Head of a group’ and references to ‘institution’ should be read as 
‘group’. 
 
Nothing in this Prudential Standard prevents an APRA-regulated institution 
5.
from adopting and applying a group policy used by a related body corporate,3 
provided that the policy has been approved by the Board4 and meets the 
requirements of this Prudential Standard.  
 
This Prudential Standard commences on 1 July 2017. 
6.
Interpretation 
 
Terms that are defined in Prudential Standard 3PS 001 Definitions, Prudential 
7.
Standard APS 001 Definitions (APS 001), Prudential Standard GPS 001 
Definitions (GPS 001) or Prudential Standard LPS 001 Definitions appear in 
bold the first time they are used in this Prudential Standard. 
 
Where this Prudential Standard provides for APRA to exercise a power or 
8.
discretion, this power or discretion is to be exercised in writing. 
 
For the purposes of this Prudential Standard:  
9.
‘group’ means a Level 2 group or a Level 3 group, as relevant; 
‘Head of a group’ means a Level 2 Head or Level 3 Head, as relevant; 
‘Level 2 group’ means the entities that comprise: 
 
Level 2 as defined in APS 001; or 
(a)
 
a Level 2 insurance group as defined in GPS 001; 
(b)
‘Level 2 Head’ means: 
 
where an ADI that is a member of a Level 2 group is not a subsidiary of 
(a)
an authorised banking NOHC or another ADI, that ADI;  
 
where an ADI that is a member of a Level 2 group is a subsidiary of an 
(b)
authorised banking NOHC, that authorised banking NOHC; or 
 
the parent entity of a Level 2 insurance group as defined in GPS 001.  
(c)
 
‘Outsourcing’ involves an APRA-regulated  institution, or an institution within 
10.
a group that is not an APRA-regulated institution, entering into an arrangement 
with another party (including a related body corporate) to perform, on a 
continuing basis, a business activity that currently is, or could be, undertaken by 
the institution itself.  
                                                 
3 
Related body corporate has the meaning given in section 50 of the Corporations Act 2001. 
4 
A reference to the Board in the case of a foreign ADI is a reference to the senior officer outside 
Australia. 
Authorised Version F2016L01436 registered 14/09/2016
 
July 2017 
 
CPS 231 - 5 
 
For the purposes of this Prudential Standard, ‘offshoring’ means the outsourcing 
11.
by an APRA-regulated institution of a material business activity associated with 
its Australian business to a service provider5 (including a related body 
corporate) where the outsourced activity is to be conducted outside Australia. 
Offshoring includes arrangements where the service provider is incorporated in 
Australia, but the physical location of the outsourced activity is outside 
Australia. Offshoring does not include arrangements where the physical location 
of an outsourced activity is within Australia but the service provider is not 
incorporated in Australia. 
 
Where the international business of a group outsources activities to a service 
12.
provider in its local jurisdiction, this does not constitute offshoring as defined in 
paragraph 11. 
Materiality 
 
This Prudential Standard only applies to the outsourcing of a material business 
13.
activity as defined in this Prudential Standard. 
 
A ‘material business activity’ is one that has the potential, if disrupted, to have a 
14.
significant impact on the APRA-regulated institution’s or group’s business 
operations or its ability to manage risks effectively, having regard to such 
factors as: 
 
the financial and operational impact and impact on reputation of a failure 
(a)
of the service provider to perform over a given period of time; 
 
the cost of the outsourcing arrangement as a share of total costs; 
(b)
 
the degree of difficulty, including the time taken, in finding an alternative 
(c)
service provider or bringing the business activity in-house; 
 
the ability of the APRA-regulated institution or member of the group to 
(d)
meet regulatory requirements if there are problems with the service 
provider; 
 
potential losses to the APRA-regulated institution’s or group’s customers 
(e)
and other affected parties in the event of a service provider failure; and 
 
affiliation or other relationship between the APRA-regulated institution or 
(f)
group and the service provider. 
 
For the purposes of this Prudential Standard, the internal audit function and the 
15.
risk management function are material business activities. 
Additional requirements of the Head of a group 
 
The Head of a group must maintain a group outsourcing policy that meets the 
16.
requirements of paragraphs 23 to 25 on a group basis. The group outsourcing 
                                                 
5 
Service provider is a reference to the institution providing the outsourced services to the APRA-
regulated institution. 
Authorised Version F2016L01436 registered 14/09/2016
 
July 2017 
 
CPS 231 - 6 
policy must include a strategy for the outsourcing of material business activities 
that applies to all members of the group. 
 
The Head of a group must, except where an APRA-regulated institution within 
17.
the group has otherwise notified APRA of that information: 
 
notify APRA in accordance with paragraphs 37 to 38 in respect of each 
(a)
outsourcing agreement for a material business activity across the group; 
 
consult with APRA in accordance with paragraphs 39 to 40 in respect of 
(b)
each offshoring agreement for a material business activity across the 
group; 
 
advise APRA of any significant problems that have the potential to 
(c)
materially affect the outsourcing arrangement and, as a consequence, 
materially affect the business operations, profitability or reputation of the 
group; and 
 
notify APRA in accordance with paragraph 43 where an outsourcing 
(d)
agreement for a material business activity across the group is terminated. 
 
The group internal audit function must review any proposed outsourcing of a 
18.
material business activity of the group, except where the internal audit function 
of an APRA-regulated institution within the group has reviewed the proposed 
outsourcing. The group internal audit function must regularly review and report 
to the Board of the Head of the group or group Board Audit Committee on 
compliance with the group outsourcing policy. 
 
Where an institution within the group that is not an APRA-regulated institution 
19.
outsources business activities that are material to the group, the Head of the 
group must ensure that the outsourcing of those business activities is undertaken 
in a way that complies with the group outsourcing policy.6 
The role of the Board and senior management 
 
An APRA-regulated institution must identify, assess, manage, mitigate and 
20.
report on risks associated with outsourcing to meet the institution’s financial 
and service obligations to its depositors, policyholders and other stakeholders. 
 
An APRA-regulated institution must have procedures to ensure that all the 
21.
institution’s relevant business units are made aware of, and have processes and 
controls for monitoring compliance with, the outsourcing policy. 
 
The Board is ultimately responsible for oversight of any outsourcing of a 
22.
material business activity undertaken by an APRA-regulated institution. 
Although outsourcing may result in the service provider having day-to-day 
managerial responsibility for a business activity, the APRA-regulated institution 
is responsible for complying with all prudential requirements that relate to the 
outsourced business activity. 
                                                 
6 
This paragraph does not override any requirements applying to an RSE licensee in SPS 231. 
Authorised Version F2016L01436 registered 14/09/2016
 
July 2017 
 
CPS 231 - 7 
Outsourcing policy 
 
The Board of an APRA-regulated institution must approve the institution’s 
23.
outsourcing policy, which must set out the approach to outsourcing of material 
business activities, including a detailed framework for managing all such 
outsourcing arrangements.  
 
The Board of an APRA-regulated institution must ensure that outsourcing risks 
24.
and controls are taken into account as part of the institution’s risk management 
strategy and when completing a risk management declaration required to be 
provided to APRA.7 
 
The outsourcing policy must set out specific requirements in relation to 
25.
outsourcing to related bodies corporate and outsourcing to service providers 
conducting the material business activity outside Australia. 
Assessment of outsourcing options 
 
An APRA-regulated institution must be able to demonstrate to APRA that, in 
26.
assessing the options for outsourcing a material business activity to a ‘third 
party’,8 it has: 
(a) 
prepared a business case for outsourcing the material business activity; 
(b) 
undertaken a tender or other selection process for selecting the service 
provider; 
(c) 
undertaken a due diligence review of the chosen service provider, 
including the ability of the service provider to conduct the business 
activity on an ongoing basis;   
(d) 
involved the Board of the APRA-regulated institution, Board committee 
of the APRA-regulated institution, or senior manager of the institution 
with delegated authority from the Board, in approving the agreement; 
(e) 
considered all the matters outlined in paragraph 29, that must, at a 
minimum, be included in the outsourcing agreement itself; 
(f) 
established procedures for monitoring performance under the outsourcing 
agreement on a continuing basis;  
(g) 
addressed the renewal process for outsourcing agreements and how the 
renewal will be conducted; and 
(h) 
developed contingency plans that would enable the outsourced business 
activity to be provided by an alternative service provider or brought in-
house if required. 
                                                 
7 
For details of the risk management framework for regulated institutions refer to Prudential 
Standard CPS 220 Risk Management. 
8 
For the purposes of this Prudential Standard, ‘third party’ is a reference to an institution that is 
not the APRA-regulated institution or a related body corporate of the APRA-regulated 
institution. 
Authorised Version F2016L01436 registered 14/09/2016
 
July 2017 
 
CPS 231 - 8 
 
An APRA-regulated institution must be able to demonstrate to APRA that, in 
27.
assessing the options for outsourcing to related bodies corporate, it has taken 
into account: 
 
the changes to the risk profile of the business activity that arise from 
(a)
outsourcing the activity to a related body corporate and how this changed 
risk profile is addressed within the institution’s risk management 
framework; 
 
that the related body corporate has the ability to conduct the business 
(b)
activity on an ongoing basis; 
 
the required monitoring procedures to ensure that the related body 
(c)
corporate is performing effectively and how potential inadequate 
performance would be addressed;  
 
contingency issues in accordance with Prudential Standard CPS 232 
(d)
Business Continuity Management (CPS 232) should the outsourced 
activity need to be brought in-house; and  
 
the need to apply any of the requirements set out in paragraph 26 to the 
(e)
extent they are relevant to outsourcing agreements with related bodies 
corporate. 
The outsourcing agreement 
 
Each outsourcing arrangement must be contained in a documented legally 
28.
binding agreement, except where otherwise provided in this Prudential 
Standard. The agreement must be signed by all parties to it before the 
outsourcing arrangement commences. 
 
At a minimum, the agreement (including arrangements with related bodies 
29.
corporate) must address the following matters: 
 
the scope of the arrangement and services to be supplied; 
(a)
 
commencement and end dates; 
(b)
 
review provisions; 
 
(c)
 
pricing and fee structure; 
(d)
 
service levels and performance requirements; 
(e)
 
the form in which data is to be kept and clear provisions identifying 
(f)
ownership and control of data; 
 
reporting requirements, including content and frequency of reporting; 
(g)
 
audit and monitoring procedures; 
(h)
 
business continuity management; 
(i)
Authorised Version F2016L01436 registered 14/09/2016
 
July 2017 
 
CPS 231 - 9 
 
confidentiality, privacy and security of information; 
(j)
 
default arrangements and termination provisions; 
(k)
 
dispute resolution arrangements; 
(l)
 liability and indemnity;  
(m)
 
sub-contracting;  
(n)
 
insurance; and 
(o)
 
to the extent applicable, offshoring arrangements (including through sub-
(p)
contracting). 
 
An APRA-regulated institution that outsources a material business activity must 
30.
ensure that its outsourcing agreement includes an indemnity to the effect that 
any sub-contracting by a third party service provider of the outsourced function 
will be the responsibility of the third party service provider, including liability 
for any failure on the part of the sub-contractor. 
 
The requirements in paragraph 28 do not apply to an outsourcing arrangement 
31.
with a related body corporate unless: 
(a) 
after having consulted with the APRA-regulated institution, APRA 
notifies the APRA-regulated institution, in writing, that the outsourcing 
arrangement must be evidenced by a documented legally binding 
agreement;  
(b) 
another prudential standard requires the arrangement to be undertaken 
under a documented legally binding agreement; or 
(c) 
in the case of a general insurer, the outsourcing arrangement is between a 
Category D insurer9 and a related body corporate.   
 
Where a foreign ADI, Category C insurer or EFLIC enters into an outsourcing 
32.
arrangement with its head office, the requirements of subparagraph 27(d) and 
paragraph 28 do not apply. 
                                                 
9 
Refer to GPS 001.  
Authorised Version F2016L01436 registered 14/09/2016
 
July 2017 
 
CPS 231 - 10 
 
Where: 
33.
(a) 
an APRA-regulated institution invokes the institution’s Business 
Continuity Plan10 as a result of an unexpected event; or 
(b) 
there is a sudden financial or operational failure of an existing service 
provider, 
and, as a result, enters into a new outsourcing agreement, the APRA-regulated 
institution must comply with paragraphs 26 to 31 inclusive, 37, 38, and 39 only 
to the extent that is reasonably possible having regard to the nature of the 
extreme event or sudden failure. The APRA-regulated institution must notify 
APRA as soon as practicable of any such outsourcing arrangement. 
APRA access to service providers 
 
An outsourcing agreement must include a clause that allows APRA access to 
34.
documentation and information related to the outsourcing arrangement. In the 
normal course, APRA will seek to obtain whatever information it requires from 
the APRA-regulated institution; however, the outsourcing agreement must 
include the right for APRA to conduct on-site visits to the service provider if 
APRA considers this necessary in its role as prudential supervisor. APRA 
expects service providers to cooperate with APRA’s requests for information 
and assistance. If APRA intends to undertake an on-site visit to a service 
provider, it will normally inform the APRA-regulated institution of its intention 
to do so. 
 
Where an APRA-regulated institution enters into an outsourcing arrangement 
35.
with a related body corporate, the APRA-regulated institution must ensure that 
access by APRA to the related body corporate is not impeded. 
 
An APRA-regulated institution must take all reasonable steps to ensure that a 
36.
service provider will not disclose or advertise that APRA has conducted an on-
site visit, except as necessary to coordinate with other institutions regulated by 
APRA that are existing clients of the service provider. 
Notification requirement 
 
An APRA-regulated institution must notify APRA as soon as possible after 
37.
entering into an outsourcing agreement, and in any event no later than 20 
business days after execution of the outsourcing agreement. This notification 
requirement applies to all outsourcing of material business activities.  
 
When an APRA-regulated institution notifies APRA of a new outsourcing 
38.
agreement, it must also provide a summary to APRA of the key risks involved 
in the outsourcing arrangement and the risk mitigation strategies put in place to 
address these risks. APRA may request additional material where it considers it 
necessary in order to assess the impact of the outsourcing arrangement on the 
institution’s risk profile. 
                                                 
10 
Refer to CPS 232. 
Authorised Version F2016L01436 registered 14/09/2016
 
July 2017 
 
CPS 231 - 11 
Offshoring arrangements – requirement for consultation 
 
An APRA-regulated institution must consult with APRA prior to entering into 
39.
any offshoring agreement involving a material business activity so that APRA 
may satisfy itself that the impact of the offshoring arrangement has been 
adequately addressed as part of the institution’s risk management framework. 
 
If, in APRA’s view, the offshoring agreement involves risks that the APRA-
40.
regulated institution is not managing appropriately, APRA may require the 
APRA-regulated institution to make other arrangements for the outsourced 
activity as soon as practicable. 
Monitoring the relationship  
 
An APRA-regulated institution must ensure the institution has sufficient and 
41.
appropriate resources to manage and monitor each outsourcing relationship at 
all times. The type and extent of resources required will depend on the 
materiality of the outsourced business activity. At a minimum, monitoring must 
include: 
 
maintaining appropriate levels of regular contact with the service 
(a)
provider. This will range from daily operational contact to senior 
management involvement; and 
 
a process for regular monitoring of performance under the agreement, 
(b)
including meeting criteria concerning service levels.  
 
An APRA-regulated institution must advise APRA of any significant problems 
42.
that have the potential to materially affect the outsourcing arrangement and, as a 
consequence, materially affect the business operations, profitability or 
reputation of the institution. 
 
Where an outsourcing agreement is terminated, an APRA-regulated institution 
43.
must notify APRA as soon as practicable and provide a statement about the 
transition arrangements and future strategies for carrying out the outsourced 
material business activity. 
Audit arrangements  
 
An institution’s internal audit function must review any proposed outsourcing of 
44.
a material business activity and regularly review and report to the Board or 
Board Audit Committee on compliance with the institution’s outsourcing 
policy. Where APRA has exempted an institution from having a dedicated 
internal audit function, or approved alternative arrangements under Prudential 
Standard CPS 510 Governance, APRA may also vary the requirements of this 
paragraph. 
 
APRA may request the external auditor of an institution, or an appropriate 
45.
external expert, to provide an assessment of the risk management processes in 
place with respect to an arrangement to outsource a material business activity. 
This could cover areas such as information technology systems, data security, 
Authorised Version F2016L01436 registered 14/09/2016
 
July 2017 
 
CPS 231 - 12 
internal control frameworks and business continuity plans. Such reports will be 
paid for by the institution and must be made available to APRA. 
Adjustments and exclusions 
 
APRA may adjust or exclude a specific prudential requirement in this Prudential 
46.
Standard in relation to an APRA-regulated institution.11 
Determinations made under previous prudential standards 
 
An exercise of APRA’s discretion (such as an approval, waiver or direction) 
47.
under a previous version of this Prudential Standard continues to have effect as 
though exercised pursuant to a corresponding power (if any) exercisable by 
APRA under this Prudential Standard. For the purposes of this paragraph, ‘a 
previous version of this Prudential Standard’ includes any versions of: 
(a) 
Prudential Standard APS 231 Outsourcing; 
(b) 
Prudential Standard GPS 231 Outsourcing; 
(c) 
Prudential Standard LPS 231 Outsourcing; and 
(d) 
Prudential Standard GPS 221 Risk Management: Level 2 Insurance 
Groups (GPS 221), to the extent that GPS 221 related to outsourcing.  
                                                 
11  
Refer to subsection 11AF(2) of the Banking Act, subsection 32(3D) of the Insurance Act and 
subsection 230A(4) of the Life Insurance Act. 
Authorised Version F2016L01436 registered 14/09/2016


--- End of file: CPS 231 Outsourcing.txt ---

 
 
 
 
Banking, Insurance and Life Insurance (prudential 
standard) determination No. 7 of 2016  
Prudential Standard CPS 232 Business Continuity 
Management 
Banking Act 1959 
Insurance Act 1973 
Life Insurance Act 1995 
 
I, Wayne Byres, delegate of APRA: 
 
(a) 
under subsection 11AF(3) of the Banking Act 1959 REVOKE Banking, 
Insurance and Life Insurance (prudential standard) determination No. 2 of 2014, 
including Prudential Standard CPS 232 Business Continuity Management made 
under that Determination, to the extent that it applied to all ADIs and authorised 
banking NOHCs; 
 
(b) 
under subsection 32(4) of the Insurance Act 1973 REVOKE Banking, Insurance 
and Life Insurance (prudential standard) determination No. 2 of 2014, including 
Prudential Standard CPS 232 Business Continuity Management made under 
that Determination, to the extent that it applied to all general insurers, authorised 
insurance NOHCs, and subsidiaries of general insurers and authorised insurance 
NOHCs; 
 
(c) 
under subsection 230A(5) of the Life Insurance Act 1995 REVOKE Banking, 
Insurance and Life Insurance (prudential standard) determination No. 2 of 2014, 
including Prudential Standard CPS 232 Business Continuity Management made 
under that Determination, to the extent that it applied to life companies,  
friendly societies, registered life NOHCs, and subsidiaries of life companies and 
registered life NOHCs; 
 
(d) 
under subsection 11AF(1) of the Banking Act 1959 DETERMINE Prudential 
Standard CPS 232 Business Continuity Management in the form set out in the 
Schedule, to the extent that it applies to all ADIs and authorised banking 
NOHCs;  
 
Authorised Version F2016L01431 registered 14/09/2016
 
 
 
(e) 
under subsection 32(1) of the Insurance Act 1973 DETERMINE Prudential 
Standard CPS 232 Business Continuity Management in the form set out in the 
Schedule, to the extent that it applies to all general insurers, authorised 
insurance NOHCs, and subsidiaries of general insurers and authorised insurance 
NOHCs; and 
 
(f) 
under subsection 230A(1) of the Life Insurance Act 1995 DETERMINE 
Prudential Standard CPS 232 Business Continuity Management in the form set 
out in the Schedule, to the extent that it applies to all life companies, friendly 
societies, registered life NOHCs, and subsidiaries of life companies and 
registered life NOHCs.  
 
This instrument commences on 1 July 2017. 
 
 
Dated: 8 September 2016  
 
[Signed] 
 
Wayne Byres 
Chairman 
Interpretation 
In this Determination: 
ADI has the meaning given in section 5 of the Banking Act 1959. 
APRA means the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority. 
authorised banking NOHC has the meaning given to the expression authorised 
NOHC in section 5 of the Banking Act 1959. 
authorised insurance NOHC has the meaning given to the expression authorised 
NOHC in subsection 3(1) of the Insurance Act 1973. 
friendly society has the meaning given in section 16C of the Life Insurance Act 1995. 
general insurer has the meaning given in section 11 of the Insurance Act 1973. 
life company has the meaning given in the Schedule to the Life Insurance Act 1995. 
registered life NOHC has the meaning given to the expression registered NOHC in 
the Schedule to the Life Insurance Act 1995. 
 
Schedule  
 
Prudential Standard CPS 232 Business Continuity Management comprises the 9 
pages commencing on the following page.  
Authorised Version F2016L01431 registered 14/09/2016
 
July 2017 
 
CPS 232 - 1 
 
Prudential Standard CPS 232 
Business Continuity Management 
Objectives and key requirements of this Prudential 
Standard 
This Prudential Standard requires each APRA-regulated institution and Head of a 
group to implement a whole-of-business approach to business continuity management 
that is appropriate to the nature and scale of the operations. Business continuity 
management increases resilience to business disruption arising from internal and 
external events and may reduce the impact on the institution’s or group’s business 
operations, reputation, profitability, depositors, policyholders and other stakeholders. 
The Board of an APRA regulated institution and the Board of a Head of a group, 
respectively, have ultimate responsibility for the business continuity of the institution 
or group. 
The key requirements of this Prudential Standard are that an APRA-regulated 
institution and a Head of a group must: 
 
maintain a business continuity management policy for the institution or group, 
approved by the Board; 
 
identify, assess and manage potential business continuity risks to ensure that it 
is able to meet its financial and service obligations to its depositors, 
policyholders and other stakeholders; 
 
consider business continuity risks and controls as part of its risk management 
framework; 
 
maintain a business continuity plan that documents procedures and information 
which enable the institution to manage business disruptions; 
 
review the business continuity plan annually and periodically arrange for its 
review by the internal audit function or an appropriate external expert; and 
 
notify APRA in the event of certain disruptions. 
Where an APRA-regulated institution is the Head of a group, this Prudential Standard 
requires that the group has in place business continuity management appropriate to the 
Authorised Version F2016L01431 registered 14/09/2016
 
July 2017 
 
CPS 232 - 2 
nature and scale of the group’s operations, and the provisions of this Prudential 
Standard are applied appropriately throughout the group, including in relation to 
institutions that are not APRA-regulated. In addition, where specified, the Head of a 
group must comply with the requirements on a group basis. 
Authorised Version F2016L01431 registered 14/09/2016
 
July 2017 
 
CPS 232 - 3 
Authority 
 
This Prudential Standard is made under:  
1.
 
section 11AF of the Banking Act 1959 (Banking Act); 
(a)
 
section 32 of the Insurance Act 1973 (Insurance Act); and 
(b)
 
section 230A of the Life Insurance Act 1995 (Life Insurance Act). 
(c)
Application 
 
This Prudential Standard applies to all ‘APRA-regulated institutions’,1 defined 
2.
as: 
 
all authorised deposit-taking institutions (ADIs), including foreign 
(a)
ADIs, and non-operating holding companies authorised under the 
Banking Act (authorised banking NOHCs); 
 
all general insurers, including Category C insurers, non-operating 
(b)
holding companies authorised under the Insurance Act (authorised 
insurance NOHCs) and parent entities of Level 2 insurance groups; and 
 
all life companies, including friendly societies and eligible foreign life 
(c)
insurance companies (EFLICs), and non-operating holding companies 
registered under the Life Insurance Act (registered life NOHCs).  
 
All APRA-regulated institutions have to comply with this Prudential Standard 
3.
in its entirety, unless otherwise expressly indicated. The obligations imposed by 
this Prudential Standard on, or in relation to, a foreign ADI, a Category C 
insurer or an EFLIC apply only in relation to the Australian branch operations 
of that institution. 
 
Where an APRA-regulated institution is the ‘Head of a group’,2 it must comply 
4.
with a requirement of this Prudential Standard: 
 
in its capacity as an APRA-regulated institution;  
(a)
 
by ensuring that the requirement is applied appropriately throughout the 
(b)
group, including in relation to institutions that are not APRA-regulated; 
and 
 
on a group basis. 
(c)
In applying the requirements of this Prudential Standard on a group basis, 
references in paragraphs 17 to 40 to an ‘APRA-regulated institution’ should be 
                                                 
1 
Note, for the purposes of this Prudential Standard, an RSE licensee is not treated as an ‘APRA-
regulated institution’. Refer to Prudential Standard SPS 232 Business Continuity Management 
(SPS 232) for requirements relating to business continuity management for an RSE licensee. 
2 
Where a Level 2 group operates within a Level 3 group, a requirement expressed as applying to 
a Head of a group is to be read as applying to the Level 3 Head. 
Authorised Version F2016L01431 registered 14/09/2016
 
July 2017 
 
CPS 232 - 4 
read as ‘Head of a group’ and references to ‘institution’ should be read as 
‘group’. 
 
This Prudential Standard applies whether or not activities are outsourced to 
5.
related bodies corporate or third-party service providers. This Prudential 
Standard also applies to arrangements where the service provider is located 
outside Australia or the functions are performed outside Australia. 
 
Nothing in this Prudential Standard prevents an APRA-regulated institution 
6.
from adopting and applying a group policy used by a related body corporate, 
provided that the policy has been approved by the Board3 of the regulated 
institution and meets the requirements of this Prudential Standard. 
 
This Prudential Standard commences on 1 July 2017. 
7.
Interpretation 
 
Terms that are defined in Prudential Standard 3PS 001 Definitions, Prudential 
8.
Standard APS 001 Definitions (APS 001), Prudential Standard GPS 001 
Definitions (GPS 001) or Prudential Standard LPS 001 Definitions appear in 
bold the first time they are used in this Prudential Standard. 
 
Where this Prudential Standard provides for APRA to exercise a power or 
9.
discretion, this power or discretion is to be exercised in writing. 
 
For the purposes of this Prudential Standard:  
10.
‘group’ means a Level 2 group or a Level 3 group, as relevant; 
‘Head of a group’ means a Level 2 Head or Level 3 Head, as relevant; 
‘Level 2 group’ means the entities that comprise: 
 
Level 2 as defined in APS 001; or 
(a)
 
a Level 2 insurance group as defined in GPS 001; 
(b)
‘Level 2 Head’ means: 
 
where an ADI that is a member of a Level 2 group is not a subsidiary of 
(a)
an authorised banking NOHC or another ADI, that ADI; 
 
where an ADI that is a member of a Level 2 group is a subsidiary of an 
(b)
authorised banking NOHC, that authorised banking NOHC; or 
 
the parent entity of a Level 2 insurance group as defined in GPS 001. 
(c)
                                                 
3 
A reference to the Board in the case of a foreign ADI is a reference to the senior officer outside 
Australia. 
Authorised Version F2016L01431 registered 14/09/2016
 
July 2017 
 
CPS 232 - 5 
Additional requirements of the Head of a group 
 
The Head of a group must maintain business continuity management (BCM) for 
11.
the group (see paragraphs 20 to 22) including a BCM policy for the group (see 
paragraphs 23 to 25). 
 
The Head of a group must apply BCM to risk assessments and risk processes at 
12.
a functional level in the group, where appropriate. 
 
The Board of the Head of a group must: 
13.
 
ensure that the group’s BCM is appropriate to the nature and scale of its 
(a)
operations and is consistent with the group’s risk management strategy 
and  risk management framework; 
 
oversee the appropriateness of BCM across the group; and 
(b)
 
ensure that the group’s business continuity plan (BCP) is reviewed at least 
(c)
annually by responsible senior management of the Head of the group. 
 
The Head of a group must notify APRA in accordance with paragraph 36 if the 
14.
institution experiences a major disruption that has the potential to have a 
material impact on the institution’s risk profile, or affect its financial soundness, 
except where an APRA-regulated institution within the group has otherwise 
notified APRA of that information.  
 
The group internal audit function, or an appropriate external expert, must 
15.
periodically review the group BCP and provide an assurance to the Board of the 
Head of the group, or delegated management, on the matters in paragraph 38 on 
a group basis.  
 
Where an institution within the group that is not an APRA-regulated institution 
16.
undertakes business operations critical to the group, the Head of the group must 
ensure that those business operations are undertaken in a way that complies with 
the group BCM policy. 
The role of the Board and senior management 
 
An APRA-regulated institution must identify, assess, manage, mitigate and 
17.
report on potential business continuity risks to ensure that the institution is able 
to meet its financial and service obligations to its depositors, policyholders and 
other stakeholders. 
 
The Board is ultimately responsible for the business continuity of the institution. 
18.
The Board remains ultimately responsible for BCM of the institution whether or 
not business operations are outsourced or are part of a corporate group.4 
                                                 
4 
Refer to Prudential Standard CPS 231 Outsourcing (CPS 231) for further information on 
requirements relating to outsourcing. 
Authorised Version F2016L01431 registered 14/09/2016
 
July 2017 
 
CPS 232 - 6 
 
The Board must ensure that the business continuity risks and controls are taken 
19.
into account as part of the institution’s risk management strategy and when 
completing a risk management declaration required to be provided to APRA.5 
Business continuity management 
 
BCM is a whole-of-business approach that includes policies, standards and 
20.
procedures for ensuring that critical business operations can be maintained or 
recovered in a timely fashion, in the event of a disruption. Its purpose is to 
minimise the financial, legal, regulatory, reputational and other material 
consequences arising from a disruption. 
 
Critical business operations are the business functions, resources and 
21.
infrastructure that may, if disrupted, have a material impact on the institution’s 
business functions, reputation, profitability, depositors and/or policyholders.  
 
BCM must, at a minimum, include: 
22.
 
a BCM policy in accordance with paragraphs 23 to 25;  
(a)
 
a business impact analysis (BIA) including risk assessment in accordance 
(b)
with paragraphs 26 and 27; 
 
recovery objectives and strategies; in accordance with paragraphs 28 and 
(c)
29; 
 
a BCP in accordance with paragraphs 30 to 33; and 
(d)
 
programs for:  
(e)
(i) 
review and testing of the BCP in accordance with paragraphs 34 and 
35; and 
(ii) 
training and ensuring awareness of staff in relation to BCM.  
Business continuity management policy 
 
The Board must approve the institution’s BCM policy. 
23.
 
The BCM policy must be up-to-date, documented and must set out the 
24.
objectives and approach in relation to BCM. 
 
The BCM policy must clearly state the roles, responsibilities and authorities to 
25.
act in relation to the BCM policy. 
Business impact analysis 
 
A BIA involves identifying all critical business functions, resources and 
26.
infrastructure of the institution and assessing the impact of a disruption on these. 
                                                 
5 
For details of the risk management framework for regulated institutions refer to Prudential 
Standard CPS 220 Risk Management. 
Authorised Version F2016L01431 registered 14/09/2016
 
July 2017 
 
CPS 232 - 7 
 
When conducting the BIA, the APRA-regulated institution must consider: 
27.
 
plausible disruption scenarios over varying periods of time; 
(a)
 
the period of time for which the institution could not operate without each 
(b)
of its critical business operations;  
 
the extent to which a disruption to the critical business operations might 
(c)
have a material impact on the interests of depositors and/or policyholders 
of the institution; and 
 
the financial, legal, regulatory and reputational impact of a disruption to 
(d)
the institution’s critical business operations over varying periods of time. 
Recovery objectives and strategies 
 
Recovery objectives are pre-defined goals for recovering critical business 
28.
operations to a specified level of service (recovery level) within a defined period 
(recovery time) following a disruption. 
 
An APRA-regulated institution must identify and document appropriate 
29.
recovery objectives and implementation strategies based on the results of the 
BIA and the size and complexity of the institution. 
Business continuity planning 
 
An APRA-regulated institution must maintain at all times a documented BCP 
30.
for the institution that meets the objectives of the institution’s BCM policy.6 
 
The BCP must document procedures and information that enable the institution 
31.
to: 
 
manage an initial business disruption (crisis management); and 
(a)
 
recover critical business operations. 
(b)
 
The BCP must reflect the specific requirements of the institution and must 
32.
identify:  
 
critical business operations; 
(a)
 
recovery levels and time targets for each critical business operation; 
(b)
 
recovery strategies for each critical business operation; 
(c)
 
infrastructure and resources required to implement the BCP; 
(d)
 
roles, responsibilities and authorities to act in relation to the BCP; and 
(e)
                                                 
6 
A reference to a ‘BCP’ includes a reference to more than one BCP where appropriate. An 
institution may have a number of BCPs. A BCP may include a separate crisis management plan 
and disaster recovery plan. 
Authorised Version F2016L01431 registered 14/09/2016
 
July 2017 
 
CPS 232 - 8 
 
communication plans with staff and external stakeholders. 
(f)
 
Where material business activities are outsourced, an APRA-regulated 
33.
institution must satisfy itself as to the adequacy of the outsourced service 
provider’s BCP and must consider any dependencies between the two BCPs. 
Review and testing of the Business Continuity Plan 
 
An APRA-regulated institution must review and test the institution’s BCP at 
34.
least annually, or more frequently if there are material changes to business 
operations, to ensure that the BCP can meet the BCM objectives. The results of 
the testing must be formally reported to the Board or to delegated management.7   
 
The BCP must be updated if shortcomings are identified as a result of the 
35.
review and testing required under paragraph 34. 
Notification requirements 
 
An APRA-regulated institution must notify APRA as soon as possible and no 
36.
later than 24 hours after the institution experiences a major disruption that has 
the potential to have a material impact on the institution’s risk profile, or affect 
its financial soundness. The APRA-regulated institution must explain to APRA 
the nature of the disruption, the action being taken, the likely effect and the 
timeframe for returning to normal operations. The APRA-regulated institution 
must notify APRA when normal operations resume. 
 
The information or notifications required by this Prudential Standard must be 
37.
given in such form, if any, and by such procedures, if any, as APRA determines 
and publishes on its website from time to time. 
Audit arrangements 
 
An institution’s internal audit function, or an appropriate external expert, must 
38.
periodically review the BCP and provide an assurance to the Board or to 
delegated management that:  
 
the BCP is in accordance with the institution’s BCM policy and addresses 
(a)
the risks it is designed to control; and 
 
testing procedures are adequate and have been conducted satisfactorily. 
(b)
 
APRA may request the external auditor of the institution, or another appropriate 
39.
external expert, to provide an assessment of the institution’s BCM 
arrangements. Any such report must be paid for by the institution and must be 
made available to APRA.8 
                                                 
7 
A material change to business operations includes a change in a material outsourcing 
arrangement. Refer to CPS 231 for further information on outsourcing. 
8 
Refer to Prudential Standard 3PS 310 Audit and Related Matters, Prudential Standard APS 310 
Audit and Related Matters, Prudential Standard GPS 310 Audit and Related Matters and 
Prudential Standard LPS 310 Audit and Related Matters. 
Authorised Version F2016L01431 registered 14/09/2016
 
July 2017 
 
CPS 232 - 9 
Adjustments and exclusions 
 
APRA may adjust or exclude a specific requirement in this Prudential Standard 
40.
in relation to an APRA-regulated institution.9 
Determinations made under previous prudential standards 
 
An exercise of APRA’s discretion (such as an approval, waiver or direction) 
41.
under a previous version of this Prudential Standard continues to have effect as 
though exercised pursuant to a corresponding power (if any) exercisable by 
APRA under this Prudential Standard. For the purposes of this paragraph, ‘a 
previous version of this Prudential Standard’ includes any versions of: 
 
Prudential Standard APS 232 Business Continuity Management 
(a)
(including Guidance Note AGN 232.1 Risk Assessment and Business 
Continuity Management);  
 
Prudential Standard GPS 222 Business Continuity Management 
(b)
(including Guidance Note GGN 222.1 Risk Assessment and Business 
Continuity Management);  
 
Prudential Standard LPS 232 Business Continuity Management; and 
(c)
 
Prudential Standard GPS 221 Risk Management: Level 2 Insurance 
(d)
Groups (GPS 221), to the extent that GPS 221 related to business 
continuity management. 
                                                 
9 
Refer to subsection 11AF(2) of the Banking Act, subsection 32(3D) of the Insurance Act and 
subsection 230A(4) of the Life Insurance Act. 
Authorised Version F2016L01431 registered 14/09/2016


--- End of file: CPS 232 Business Continuity.txt ---

 
Banking, Insurance, Life Insurance, Health Insurance 
and Superannuation (prudential standard) 
determination No. 1 of 2018  
Prudential Standard CPS 234 Information Security 
Banking Act 1959 
Insurance Act 1973 
Life Insurance Act 1995 
Private Health Insurance (Prudential Supervision) Act 2015 
Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993 
 
I, Geoff Summerhayes, delegate of APRA: 
 
(a) 
under subsection 11AF(1) of the Banking Act 1959, DETERMINE Prudential 
Standard CPS 234 Information Security in the form set out in the Schedule, 
which applies to all ADIs and authorised banking NOHCs;  
 
(b) 
under subsection 32(1) of the Insurance Act 1973 DETERMINE Prudential 
Standard CPS 234 Information Security in the form set out in the Schedule, 
which applies to all general insurers and authorised insurance NOHCs; 
 
(c) 
under subsection 230A(1) of the Life Insurance Act 1995 DETERMINE 
Prudential Standard CPS 234 Information Security in the form set out in the 
Schedule, which applies to all life companies, including friendly societies, and 
registered life NOHCs; 
 
(d) 
under subsection 92(1) of the Private Health Insurance (Prudential 
Supervision) Act 2015 DETERMINE Prudential Standard CPS 234 Information 
Security in the form set out in the Schedule, which applies to all private health 
insurers; and 
 
(e) 
under subsection 34C(1) of the Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993 
DETERMINE Prudential Standard CPS 234 Information Security in the form 
set out in the Schedule, which applies to all RSE licensees. 
 
This instrument commences on 1 July 2019. 
Authorised Version F2018L01745 registered 12/12/2018
 
 
 
 
 
Dated: 30 November 2018 
 
 [Signed] 
 
Geoff Summerhayes 
Member 
 
Interpretation 
In this Determination: 
ADI has the meaning in section 5 of the Banking Act 1959. 
APRA means the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority. 
authorised banking NOHC has the meaning given to the expression authorised 
NOHC in section 5 of the Banking Act 1959. 
authorised deposit-taking institution has the meaning given in section 5 of the 
Banking Act 1959. 
authorised insurance NOHC has the meaning given to the expression authorised 
NOHC in subsection 3(1) of the Insurance Act 1973. 
friendly society has the meaning given in section 16C of the Life Insurance Act 1995. 
general insurer has the meaning given in section 11 of the Insurance Act 1973. 
life company has the meaning given in the Schedule to the Life Insurance Act 1995. 
private health insurer has the meaning given in section 4 of the Private Health 
Insurance (Prudential Supervision) Act 2015. 
registered life NOHC has the meaning given to the expression registered NOHC in 
the Schedule to the Life Insurance Act 1995. 
RSE licensee has the meaning given in section 10 of the Superannuation Industry 
(Supervision) Act 1993. 
 
Schedule  
 
Prudential Standard CPS 234 Information Security comprises the document 
commencing on the following page.  
 
 
Authorised Version F2018L01745 registered 12/12/2018
 
July 2019 
 
CPS 234 – 1 
 
 
Prudential Standard CPS 234  
Information Security   
Objectives and key requirements of this Prudential 
Standard 
This Prudential Standard aims to ensure that an APRA-regulated entity takes 
measures to be resilient against information security incidents (including cyber-
attacks) by maintaining an information security capability commensurate with 
information security vulnerabilities and threats. 
A key objective is to minimise the likelihood and impact of information security 
incidents on the confidentiality, integrity or availability of information assets, 
including information assets managed by related parties or third parties. 
The Board of an APRA-regulated entity is ultimately responsible for ensuring that the 
entity maintains its information security. 
The key requirements of this Prudential Standard are that an APRA-regulated entity 
must: 
 
clearly define the information security-related roles and responsibilities of the 
Board, senior management, governing bodies and individuals; 
 
maintain an information security capability commensurate with the size and 
extent of threats to its information assets, and which enables the continued 
sound operation of the entity; 
 
implement controls to protect its information assets commensurate with the 
criticality and sensitivity of those information assets, and undertake systematic 
testing and assurance regarding the effectiveness of those controls; and 
 
notify APRA of material information security incidents. 
 
 
Authorised Version F2018L01745 registered 12/12/2018
 
July 2019 
 
CPS 234 – 2 
Authority 
1. 
This Prudential Standard is made under: 
(a) 
section 11AF of the Banking Act 1959 (Banking Act); 
(b) 
section 32 of the Insurance Act 1973 (Insurance Act);  
(c) 
section 230A of the Life Insurance Act 1995 (Life Insurance Act); 
(d) 
section 92 of the Private Health Insurance (Prudential Supervision) Act 
2015 (PHIPS Act); and 
(e) 
section 34C of the Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993 
(SIS Act). 
Application 
2. 
This Prudential Standard applies to all ‘APRA-regulated entities’ defined as: 
(a) 
authorised deposit-taking institutions (ADIs), including foreign ADIs, 
and non-operating holding companies authorised under the Banking Act 
(authorised banking NOHCs); 
(b) 
general insurers, including Category C insurers, non-operating holding 
companies authorised under the Insurance Act (authorised insurance 
NOHCs), and parent entities of Level 2 insurance groups; 
(c) 
life companies, including friendly societies,  eligible foreign life 
insurance companies (EFLICs) and non-operating holding companies 
registered under the Life Insurance Act (registered life NOHCs); 
(d) 
private health insurers registered under the PHIPS Act; and 
(e) 
RSE licensees under the SIS Act in respect of their business operations.1 
3. 
The obligations imposed by this Prudential Standard on, or in relation to, a 
foreign ADI, a Category C insurer or an EFLIC apply only in relation to the 
Australian branch operations of that entity. 
4. 
Where an APRA-regulated entity is the ‘Head of a group’,2 it must comply with 
a requirement of this Prudential Standard: 
(a) 
in its capacity as an APRA-regulated entity; 
                                                 
1  
For the purposes of this Prudential Standard, an ‘RSE licensee’s business operations’ includes 
all activities of an RSE licensee (including the activities of each RSE of which it is the licensee), 
and all other activities of the RSE licensee to the extent that they are relevant to, or may impact 
on, its activities as an RSE licensee. 
2   
Where a Level 2 group operates within a Level 3 group, a requirement expressed as applying to 
a Head of a group is to be read as applying to the Level 3 Head. 
Authorised Version F2018L01745 registered 12/12/2018
 
July 2019 
 
CPS 234 – 3 
(b) 
by ensuring that the requirement is applied appropriately throughout the 
group, including in relation to entities that are not APRA-regulated;  and 
(c) 
on a group basis. 
In applying the requirements of this Prudential Standard on a group basis, 
references in paragraphs 13 to 36 to an ‘APRA-regulated entity’ are to be read 
as ‘Head of a group’ and references to ‘entity’ are to be read as ‘group’. 
5. 
This Prudential Standard commences on 1 July 2019, subject to paragraph 6. 
6. 
Where an APRA-regulated entity’s information assets are managed by a third 
party, the requirements in this Prudential Standard will apply in relation to those 
information assets from the earlier of the next renewal date of the contract with 
the third party or 1 July 2020. 
Interpretation 
7. 
Terms that are defined in Prudential Standard APS 001 Definitions (APS 001), 
Prudential Standard GPS 001 Definitions (GPS 001), Prudential Standard  
LPS 001 Definitions, Prudential Standard HPS 001 Definitions or Prudential 
Standard 3PS 001 Definitions appear in bold the first time they are used in this 
Prudential Standard. 
8. 
In this Prudential Standard, unless the contrary intention appears, a reference to 
an Act, Regulation or Prudential Standard is a reference to the Act, Regulation 
or Prudential Standard as in force from time to time. 
9. 
Where this Prudential Standard provides for APRA to exercise a power or 
discretion, the power or discretion is to be exercised in writing. 
10. 
For the purposes of this Prudential Standard: 
‘group’ means a Level 2 group or a Level 3 group, as relevant; 
‘Head of a group’ means a Level 2 Head or Level 3 Head, as relevant; 
‘Level 2 group’ means the entities that comprise: 
(a) 
Level 2 as defined in APS 001; or 
(b) 
a Level 2 insurance group as defined in GPS 001; 
‘Level 2 Head’ means: 
(a) 
where an ADI that is a member of a Level 2 group is not a subsidiary of 
an authorised banking NOHC or another ADI, that ADI; 
(b) 
where an ADI that is a member of a Level 2 group is a subsidiary of an 
authorised banking NOHC, that authorised banking NOHC; or 
(c) 
the parent entity of a Level 2 insurance group as defined in GPS 001. 
Authorised Version F2018L01745 registered 12/12/2018
 
July 2019 
 
CPS 234 – 4 
Adjustments and exclusions 
11. 
APRA may adjust or exclude a specific prudential requirement in this Prudential 
Standard in relation to an APRA-regulated entity.3 
Definitions 
12. 
The following definitions are used in this Prudential Standard: 
(a) 
availability refers to accessibility and usability when required; 
(b) 
confidentiality refers to access being restricted only to those authorised;   
(c) 
criticality refers to the potential impact of a loss of availability; 
(d) 
information asset means information and information technology, 
including software, hardware and data (both soft and hard copy); 
(e) 
information security means the preservation of an information asset’s 
confidentiality, integrity and availability; 
(f) 
information security capability means the totality of resources, skills and 
controls which provide the ability and capacity to maintain information 
security; 
(g) 
information security control means a prevention, detection or response 
measure to reduce the likelihood or impact of an information security 
incident; 
(h) 
information security incident means an actual or potential compromise of 
information security; 
(i) 
information security policy framework means the totality of policies, 
standards, guidelines and procedures pertaining to information security; 
(j) 
information security threat (threat) is a circumstance or event that has the 
potential to exploit an information security vulnerability; 
(k) 
information security vulnerability (vulnerability) is a weakness in an 
information asset or information security control that could be exploited to 
compromise information security; 
(l) 
integrity refers to completeness, accuracy and freedom from unauthorised 
change or usage; and 
(m) sensitivity means the potential impact of a loss of confidentiality or 
integrity. 
                                                 
3  
Refer to subsection 11AF(2) of the Banking Act, subsection 32(3D) of the Insurance Act, 
subsection 230A(4) of the Life Insurance Act, subsection 92(4) of the PHIPS Act and subsection 
34C(5) of the SIS Act. 
Authorised Version F2018L01745 registered 12/12/2018
 
July 2019 
 
CPS 234 – 5 
Roles and responsibilities 
13. 
The Board4 of an APRA-regulated entity (Board) is ultimately responsible for 
the information security of the entity. The Board must ensure that the entity 
maintains information security in a manner commensurate with the size and 
extent of threats to its information assets, and which enables the continued 
sound operation of the entity.5 
14. 
An APRA-regulated entity must clearly define the information security-related 
roles and responsibilities of the Board, senior management, governing bodies 
and individuals with responsibility for decision-making, approval, oversight, 
operations and other information security functions.6 
Information security capability 
15. 
An APRA-regulated entity must maintain an information security capability 
commensurate with the size and extent of threats to its information assets, and 
which enables the continued sound operation of the entity. 
16. 
Where information assets are managed by a related party or third party, the 
APRA-regulated entity must assess the information security capability of that 
party, commensurate with the potential consequences of an information security 
incident affecting those assets.7 
17. 
An APRA-regulated entity must actively maintain its information security 
capability with respect to changes in vulnerabilities and threats, including those 
resulting from changes to information assets or its business environment. 
Policy framework 
18. 
An APRA-regulated entity must maintain an information security policy 
framework commensurate with its exposures to vulnerabilities and threats. 
19. 
An APRA-regulated entity’s information security policy framework must 
provide direction on the responsibilities of all parties who have an obligation to 
maintain information security.8 
                                                 
4  
For an RSE licensee, a reference to the Board is to be read as a reference to the Board of 
directors or group of individual trustees of an RSE licensee, as applicable. ‘Group of individual 
trustees’ has the meaning given in subsection 10(1) of the SIS Act. 
5  
A reference to the Board in the case of a foreign ADI, is a reference to the senior officer 
outside Australia. 
6  
For the purposes of this Prudential Standard, governing bodies and individuals includes 
committees, working groups and forums. 
7  
For the avoidance of doubt, paragraph 16 of this Prudential Standard applies to all information 
assets managed by related parties and third parties, not only those captured under agreements 
with service providers of outsourced material business activities under Prudential Standard CPS 
231 Outsourcing or Prudential Standard SPS 231 Outsourcing. 
8  
For the purpose of paragraph 19 of this Prudential Standard, parties includes governing bodies 
and individuals with responsibilities referred to in paragraph 14, as well as all other staff, 
contractors, consultants, related parties, third parties and customers. 
Authorised Version F2018L01745 registered 12/12/2018
 
July 2019 
 
CPS 234 – 6 
Information asset identification and classification 
20. 
An APRA-regulated entity must classify its information assets, including those 
managed by related parties and third parties, by criticality and sensitivity. This 
classification must reflect the degree to which an information security incident 
affecting an information asset has the potential to affect, financially or non-
financially, the entity or the interests of depositors, policyholders, beneficiaries 
or other customers. 
Implementation of controls 
21. 
An APRA-regulated entity must have information security controls to protect its 
information assets, including those managed by related parties and third parties, 
that are implemented in a timely manner and that are commensurate with: 
(a) 
vulnerabilities and threats to the information assets; 
(b) 
the criticality and sensitivity of the information assets; 
(c) 
the stage at which the information assets are within their life-cycle;9 and 
(d) 
the potential consequences of an information security incident. 
22. 
Where an APRA-regulated entity’s information assets are managed by a related 
party or third party, the APRA-regulated entity must evaluate the design of that 
party’s information security controls that protects the information assets of the 
APRA-regulated entity.10 
Incident management 
23. 
An APRA-regulated entity must have robust mechanisms in place to detect and 
respond to information security incidents in a timely manner. 
24. 
An APRA-regulated entity must maintain plans to respond to information 
security incidents that the entity considers could plausibly occur (information 
security response plans). 
25. 
An APRA-regulated entity’s information security response plans must include 
the mechanisms in place for: 
(a) 
managing all relevant stages of an incident, from detection to post-
incident review; and 
                                                 
9  
The use of the term ‘life-cycle’ in this context refers to the process from planning and design 
through to decommissioning and disposal of an information asset. 
10  
For the avoidance of doubt, paragraph 22 of this Prudential Standard applies to all information 
assets managed by related parties and third parties, not only those captured under agreements 
with service providers of outsourced material business activities under Prudential Standard CPS 
231 Outsourcing or Prudential Standard SPS 231 Outsourcing. 
 
Authorised Version F2018L01745 registered 12/12/2018
 
July 2019 
 
CPS 234 – 7 
(b) 
escalation and reporting of information security incidents to the Board, 
other governing bodies and individuals responsible for information 
security incident management and oversight, as appropriate. 
26. 
An APRA-regulated entity must annually review and test its information 
security response plans to ensure they remain effective and fit-for-purpose. 
Testing control effectiveness 
27. 
An APRA-regulated entity must test the effectiveness of its information security 
controls through a systematic testing program. The nature and frequency of the 
systematic testing must be commensurate with: 
(a) 
the rate at which the vulnerabilities and threats change; 
(b) 
the criticality and sensitivity of the information asset; 
(c) 
the consequences of an information security incident;  
(d) 
the risks associated with exposure to environments where the APRA-
regulated entity is unable to enforce its information security policies;11 
and 
(e) 
the materiality and frequency of change to information assets. 
28. 
Where an APRA-regulated entity’s information assets are managed by a related 
party or a third party, and the APRA-regulated entity is reliant on that party’s 
information security control testing, the APRA-regulated entity must assess 
whether the nature and frequency of testing of controls in respect of those 
information assets is commensurate with paragraphs 27(a) to 27(e) of this 
Prudential Standard.12 
29. 
An APRA-regulated entity must escalate and report to the Board or senior 
management any testing results that identify information security control 
deficiencies that cannot be remediated in a timely manner. 
30. 
An APRA-regulated entity must ensure that  testing is conducted by 
appropriately skilled and functionally independent specialists. 
31. 
An APRA-regulated entity must review the sufficiency of the testing program at 
least annually or when there is a material change to information assets or the 
business environment. 
                                                 
11  
Also referred to as an ‘untrusted’ environment. 
12  
For the avoidance of doubt, paragraph 28 of this Prudential Standard applies to all information 
assets managed by related parties and third parties, not only those captured under agreements 
with service providers of outsourced material business activities under Prudential Standard CPS 
231 Outsourcing or Prudential Standard SPS 231 Outsourcing. 
 
Authorised Version F2018L01745 registered 12/12/2018
 
July 2019 
 
CPS 234 – 8 
Internal audit 
32. 
An APRA-regulated entity’s internal audit activities must include a review of 
the design and operating effectiveness of information security controls, 
including those maintained by related parties and third parties (information 
security control assurance). 
33. 
An APRA-regulated entity must ensure that the information security control 
assurance is provided by personnel appropriately skilled in providing such 
assurance. 
34. 
An APRA-regulated entity’s internal audit function must assess the information 
security control assurance provided by a related party or third party where: 
(a) 
an information security incident affecting the information assets has the 
potential to materially affect, financially or non-financially, the entity or 
the interests of depositors, policyholders, beneficiaries or other customers; 
and 
(b) 
internal audit intends to rely on the information security control assurance 
provided by the related party or third party.13 
APRA notification 
35. 
An APRA-regulated entity must notify APRA as soon as possible and, in any 
case, no later than 72 hours, after becoming aware of an information security 
incident that: 
(a) 
materially affected, or had the potential to materially affect, financially or 
non-financially, the entity or the interests of depositors, policyholders, 
beneficiaries or other customers; or 
(b) 
has been notified to other regulators, either in Australia or other 
jurisdictions.14 
36. 
An APRA-regulated entity must notify APRA as soon as possible and, in any 
case, no later than 10 business days, after it becomes aware of a material 
information security control weakness which the entity expects it will not be 
able to remediate in a timely manner. 
                                                 
13  
For the avoidance of doubt, paragraph 34 of this Prudential Standard applies to all information 
assets managed by related parties and third parties, not only those captured under agreements 
with service providers of outsourced material business activities under Prudential Standard CPS 
231 Outsourcing or Prudential Standard SPS 231 Outsourcing. 
14  
For the avoidance of doubt, paragraph 35 of this Prudential Standard applies to notifications of 
information security incidents not already captured as notifications under Prudential Standard 
CPS 231 Outsourcing, Prudential Standard SPS 231 Outsourcing, Prudential Standard CPS 
232 Business Continuity Management or Prudential Standard SPS 232 Business Continuity 
Management. Other regulators include domestic government agencies and international 
regulators. 
Authorised Version F2018L01745 registered 12/12/2018


--- End of file: CPS 234 Information Security.txt ---

First Citizen:
Before we proceed any further, hear me speak.

All:
Speak, speak.

First Citizen:
You are all resolved rather to die than to famish?

All:
Resolved. resolved.

First Citizen:
First, you know Caius Marcius is chief enemy to the people.

All:
We know't, we know't.

First Citizen:
Let us kill him, and we'll have corn at our own price.
Is't a verdict?

All:
No more talking on't; let it be done: away, away!

Second Citizen:
One word, good citizens.

First Citizen:
We are accounted poor citizens, the patricians good.
What authority surfeits on would relieve us: if they
would yield us but the superfluity, while it were
wholesome, we might guess they relieved us humanely;
but they think we are too dear: the leanness that
afflicts us, the object of our misery, is as an
inventory to particularise their abundance; our
sufferance is a gain to them Let us revenge this with
our pikes, ere we become rakes: for the gods know I
speak this in hunger for bread, not in thirst for revenge.

Second Citizen:
Would you proceed especially against Caius Marcius?

All:
Against him first: he's a very dog to the commonalty.

Second Citizen:
Consider you what services he has done for his country?

First Citizen:
Very well; and could be content to give him good
report fort, but that he pays himself with being proud.

Second Citizen:
Nay, but speak not maliciously.

First Citizen:
I say unto you, what he hath done famously, he did
it to that end: though soft-conscienced men can be
content to say it was for his country he did it to
please his mother and to be partly proud; which he
is, even till the altitude of his virtue.

Second Citizen:
What he cannot help in his nature, you account a
vice in him. You must in no way say he is covetous.

First Citizen:
If I must not, I need not be barren of accusations;
he hath faults, with surplus, to tire in repetition.
What shouts are these? The other side o' the city
is risen: why stay we prating here? to the Capitol!

All:
Come, come.

First Citizen:
Soft! who comes here?

Second Citizen:
Worthy Menenius Agrippa; one that hath always loved
the people.

First Citizen:
He's one honest enough: would all the rest were so!

MENENIUS:
What work's, my countrymen, in hand? where go you
With bats and clubs? The matter? speak, I pray you.

First Citizen:
Our business is not unknown to the senate; they have
had inkling this fortnight what we intend to do,
which now we'll show 'em in deeds. They say poor
suitors have strong breaths: they shall know we
have strong arms too.

MENENIUS:
Why, masters, my good friends, mine honest neighbours,
Will you undo yourselves?

First Citizen:
We cannot, sir, we are undone already.

MENENIUS:
I tell you, friends, most charitable care
Have the patricians of you. For your wants,
Your suffering in this dearth, you may as well
Strike at the heaven with your staves as lift them
Against the Roman state, whose course will on
The way it takes, cracking ten thousand curbs
Of more strong link asunder than can ever
Appear in your impediment. For the dearth,
The gods, not the patricians, make it, and
Your knees to them, not arms, must help. Alack,
You are transported by calamity
Thither where more attends you, and you slander
The helms o' the state, who care for you like fathers,
When you curse them as enemies.

First Citizen:
Care for us! True, indeed! They ne'er cared for us
yet: suffer us to famish, and their store-houses
crammed with grain; make edicts for usury, to
support usurers; repeal daily any wholesome act
established against the rich, and provide more
piercing statutes daily, to chain up and restrain
the poor. If the wars eat us not up, they will; and
there's all the love they bear us.

MENENIUS:
Either you must
Confess yourselves wondrous malicious,
Or be accused of folly. I shall tell you
A pretty tale: it may be you have heard it;
But, since it serves my purpose, I will venture
To stale 't a little more.

First Citizen:
Well, I'll hear it, sir: yet you must not think to
fob off our disgrace with a tale: but, an 't please
you, deliver.

MENENIUS:
There was a time when all the body's members
Rebell'd against the belly, thus accused it:
That only like a gulf it did remain
I' the midst o' the body, idle and unactive,
Still cupboarding the viand, never bearing
Like labour with the rest, where the other instruments
Did see and hear, devise, instruct, walk, feel,
And, mutually participate, did minister
Unto the appetite and affection common
Of the whole body. The belly answer'd--

First Citizen:
Well, sir, what answer made the belly?

MENENIUS:
Sir, I shall tell you. With a kind of smile,
Which ne'er came from the lungs, but even thus--
For, look you, I may make the belly smile
As well as speak--it tauntingly replied
To the discontented members, the mutinous parts
That envied his receipt; even so most fitly
As you malign our senators for that
They are not such as you.

First Citizen:
Your belly's answer? What!
The kingly-crowned head, the vigilant eye,
The counsellor heart, the arm our soldier,
Our steed the leg, the tongue our trumpeter.
With other muniments and petty helps
In this our fabric, if that they--

MENENIUS:
What then?
'Fore me, this fellow speaks! What then? what then?

First Citizen:
Should by the cormorant belly be restrain'd,
Who is the sink o' the body,--

MENENIUS:
Well, what then?

First Citizen:
The former agents, if they did complain,
What could the belly answer?

MENENIUS:
I will tell you
If you'll bestow a small--of what you have little--
Patience awhile, you'll hear the belly's answer.

First Citizen:
Ye're long about it.

MENENIUS:
Note me this, good friend;
Your most grave belly was deliberate,
Not rash like his accusers, and thus answer'd:
'True is it, my incorporate friends,' quoth he,
'That I receive the general food at first,
Which you do live upon; and fit it is,
Because I am the store-house and the shop
Of the whole body: but, if you do remember,
I send it through the rivers of your blood,
Even to the court, the heart, to the seat o' the brain;
And, through the cranks and offices of man,
The strongest nerves and small inferior veins
From me receive that natural competency
Whereby they live: and though that all at once,
You, my good friends,'--this says the belly, mark me,--

First Citizen:
Ay, sir; well, well.

MENENIUS:
'Though all at once cannot
See what I do deliver out to each,
Yet I can make my audit up, that all
From me do back receive the flour of all,
And leave me but the bran.' What say you to't?

First Citizen:
It was an answer: how apply you this?

MENENIUS:
The senators of Rome are this good belly,
And you the mutinous members; for examine
Their counsels and their cares, digest things rightly
Touching the weal o' the common, you shall find
No public benefit which you receive
But it proceeds or comes from them to you
And no way from yourselves. What do you think,
You, the great toe of this assembly?

First Citizen:
I the great toe! why the great toe?

MENENIUS:
For that, being one o' the lowest, basest, poorest,
Of this most wise rebellion, thou go'st foremost:
Thou rascal, that art worst in blood to run,
Lead'st first to win some vantage.
But make you ready your stiff bats and clubs:
Rome and her rats are at the point of battle;
The one side must have bale.
Hail, noble Marcius!

MARCIUS:
Thanks. What's the matter, you dissentious rogues,
That, rubbing the poor itch of your opinion,
Make yourselves scabs?

First Citizen:
We have ever your good word.

MARCIUS:
He that will give good words to thee will flatter
Beneath abhorring. What would you have, you curs,
That like nor peace nor war? the one affrights you,
The other makes you proud. He that trusts to you,
Where he should find you lions, finds you hares;
Where foxes, geese: you are no surer, no,
Than is the coal of fire upon the ice,
Or hailstone in the sun. Your virtue is
To make him worthy whose offence subdues him
And curse that justice did it.
Who deserves greatness
Deserves your hate; and your affections are
A sick man's appetite, who desires most that
Which would increase his evil. He that depends
Upon your favours swims with fins of lead
And hews down oaks with rushes. Hang ye! Trust Ye?
With every minute you do change a mind,
And call him noble that was now your hate,
Him vile that was your garland. What's the matter,
That in these several places of the city
You cry against the noble senate, who,
Under the gods, keep you in awe, which else
Would feed on one another? What's their seeking?

MENENIUS:
For corn at their own rates; whereof, they say,
The city is well stored.

MARCIUS:
Hang 'em! They say!
They'll sit by the fire, and presume to know
What's done i' the Capitol; who's like to rise,
Who thrives and who declines; side factions
and give out
Conjectural marriages; making parties strong
And feebling such as stand not in their liking
Below their cobbled shoes. They say there's
grain enough!
Would the nobility lay aside their ruth,
And let me use my sword, I'll make a quarry
With thousands of these quarter'd slaves, as high
As I could pick my lance.

MENENIUS:
Nay, these are almost thoroughly persuaded;
For though abundantly they lack discretion,
Yet are they passing cowardly. But, I beseech you,
What says the other troop?

MARCIUS:
They are dissolved: hang 'em!
They said they were an-hungry; sigh'd forth proverbs,
That hunger broke stone walls, that dogs must eat,
That meat was made for mouths, that the gods sent not
Corn for the rich men only: with these shreds
They vented their complainings; which being answer'd,
And a petition granted them, a strange one--
To break the heart of generosity,
And make bold power look pale--they threw their caps
As they would hang them on the horns o' the moon,
Shouting their emulation.

MENENIUS:
What is granted them?

MARCIUS:
Five tribunes to defend their vulgar wisdoms,
Of their own choice: one's Junius Brutus,
Sicinius Velutus, and I know not--'Sdeath!
The rabble should have first unroof'd the city,
Ere so prevail'd with me: it will in time
Win upon power and throw forth greater themes
For insurrection's arguing.

MENENIUS:
This is strange.

MARCIUS:
Go, get you home, you fragments!

Messenger:
Where's Caius Marcius?

MARCIUS:
Here: what's the matter?

Messenger:
The news is, sir, the Volsces are in arms.

MARCIUS:
I am glad on 't: then we shall ha' means to vent
Our musty superfluity. See, our best elders.

First Senator:
Marcius, 'tis true that you have lately told us;
The Volsces are in arms.

MARCIUS:
They have a leader,
Tullus Aufidius, that will put you to 't.
I sin in envying his nobility,
And were I any thing but what I am,
I would wish me only he.

COMINIUS:
You have fought together.

MARCIUS:
Were half to half the world by the ears and he.
Upon my party, I'ld revolt to make
Only my wars with him: he is a lion
That I am proud to hunt.

First Senator:
Then, worthy Marcius,
Attend upon Cominius to these wars.

COMINIUS:
It is your former promise.

MARCIUS:
Sir, it is;
And I am constant. Titus Lartius, thou
Shalt see me once more strike at Tullus' face.
What, art thou stiff? stand'st out?

TITUS:
No, Caius Marcius;
I'll lean upon one crutch and fight with t'other,
Ere stay behind this business.

MENENIUS:
O, true-bred!

First Senator:
Your company to the Capitol; where, I know,
Our greatest friends attend us.

TITUS:

COMINIUS:
Noble Marcius!

First Senator:

MARCIUS:
Nay, let them follow:
The Volsces have much corn; take these rats thither
To gnaw their garners. Worshipful mutiners,
Your valour puts well forth: pray, follow.

SICINIUS:
Was ever man so proud as is this Marcius?

BRUTUS:
He has no equal.

SICINIUS:
When we were chosen tribunes for the people,--

BRUTUS:
Mark'd you his lip and eyes?

SICINIUS:
Nay. but his taunts.

BRUTUS:
Being moved, he will not spare to gird the gods.

SICINIUS:
Be-mock the modest moon.

BRUTUS:
The present wars devour him: he is grown
Too proud to be so valiant.

SICINIUS:
Such a nature,
Tickled with good success, disdains the shadow
Which he treads on at noon: but I do wonder
His insolence can brook to be commanded
Under Cominius.

BRUTUS:
Fame, at the which he aims,
In whom already he's well graced, can not
Better be held nor more attain'd than by
A place below the first: for what miscarries
Shall be the general's fault, though he perform
To the utmost of a man, and giddy censure
Will then cry out of Marcius 'O if he
Had borne the business!'

SICINIUS:
Besides, if things go well,
Opinion that so sticks on Marcius shall
Of his demerits rob Cominius.

BRUTUS:
Come:
Half all Cominius' honours are to Marcius.
Though Marcius earned them not, and all his faults
To Marcius shall be honours, though indeed
In aught he merit not.

SICINIUS:
Let's hence, and hear
How the dispatch is made, and in what fashion,
More than his singularity, he goes
Upon this present action.

BRUTUS:
Lets along.

First Senator:
So, your opinion is, Aufidius,
That they of Rome are entered in our counsels
And know how we proceed.

AUFIDIUS:
Is it not yours?
What ever have been thought on in this state,
That could be brought to bodily act ere Rome
Had circumvention? 'Tis not four days gone
Since I heard thence; these are the words: I think
I have the letter here; yes, here it is.
'They have press'd a power, but it is not known
Whether for east or west: the dearth is great;
The people mutinous; and it is rumour'd,
Cominius, Marcius your old enemy,
Who is of Rome worse hated than of you,
And Titus Lartius, a most valiant Roman,
These three lead on this preparation
Whither 'tis bent: most likely 'tis for you:
Consider of it.'

First Senator:
Our army's in the field
We never yet made doubt but Rome was ready
To answer us.

AUFIDIUS:
Nor did you think it folly
To keep your great pretences veil'd till when
They needs must show themselves; which
in the hatching,
It seem'd, appear'd to Rome. By the discovery.
We shall be shorten'd in our aim, which was
To take in many towns ere almost Rome
Should know we were afoot.

Second Senator:
Noble Aufidius,
Take your commission; hie you to your bands:
Let us alone to guard Corioli:
If they set down before 's, for the remove
Bring your army; but, I think, you'll find
They've not prepared for us.

AUFIDIUS:
O, doubt not that;
I speak from certainties. Nay, more,
Some parcels of their power are forth already,
And only hitherward. I leave your honours.
If we and Caius Marcius chance to meet,
'Tis sworn between us we shall ever strike
Till one can do no more.

All:
The gods assist you!

AUFIDIUS:
And keep your honours safe!

First Senator:
Farewell.

Second Senator:
Farewell.

All:
Farewell.

VOLUMNIA:
I pray you, daughter, sing; or express yourself in a
more comfortable sort: if my son were my husband, I
should freelier rejoice in that absence wherein he
won honour than in the embracements of his bed where
he would show most love. When yet he was but
tender-bodied and the only son of my womb, when
youth with comeliness plucked all gaze his way, when
for a day of kings' entreaties a mother should not
sell him an hour from her beholding, I, considering
how honour would become such a person. that it was
no better than picture-like to hang by the wall, if
renown made it not stir, was pleased to let him seek
danger where he was like to find fame. To a cruel
war I sent him; from whence he returned, his brows
bound with oak. I tell thee, daughter, I sprang not
more in joy at first hearing he was a man-child
than now in first seeing he had proved himself a
man.

VIRGILIA:
But had he died in the business, madam; how then?

VOLUMNIA:
Then his good report should have been my son; I
therein would have found issue. Hear me profess
sincerely: had I a dozen sons, each in my love
alike and none less dear than thine and my good
Marcius, I had rather had eleven die nobly for their
country than one voluptuously surfeit out of action.

Gentlewoman:
Madam, the Lady Valeria is come to visit you.

VIRGILIA:
Beseech you, give me leave to retire myself.

VOLUMNIA:
Indeed, you shall not.
Methinks I hear hither your husband's drum,
See him pluck Aufidius down by the hair,
As children from a bear, the Volsces shunning him:
Methinks I see him stamp thus, and call thus:
'Come on, you cowards! you were got in fear,
Though you were born in Rome:' his bloody brow
With his mail'd hand then wiping, forth he goes,
Like to a harvest-man that's task'd to mow
Or all or lose his hire.

VIRGILIA:
His bloody brow! O Jupiter, no blood!

VOLUMNIA:
Away, you fool! it more becomes a man
Than gilt his trophy: the breasts of Hecuba,
When she did suckle Hector, look'd not lovelier
Than Hector's forehead when it spit forth blood
At Grecian sword, contemning. Tell Valeria,
We are fit to bid her welcome.

VIRGILIA:
Heavens bless my lord from fell Aufidius!

VOLUMNIA:
He'll beat Aufidius 'head below his knee
And tread upon his neck.

VALERIA:
My ladies both, good day to you.

VOLUMNIA:
Sweet madam.

VIRGILIA:
I am glad to see your ladyship.

VALERIA:
How do you both? you are manifest house-keepers.
What are you sewing here? A fine spot, in good
faith. How does your little son?

VIRGILIA:
I thank your ladyship; well, good madam.

VOLUMNIA:
He had rather see the swords, and hear a drum, than
look upon his school-master.

VALERIA:
O' my word, the father's son: I'll swear,'tis a
very pretty boy. O' my troth, I looked upon him o'
Wednesday half an hour together: has such a
confirmed countenance. I saw him run after a gilded
butterfly: and when he caught it, he let it go
again; and after it again; and over and over he
comes, and again; catched it again; or whether his
fall enraged him, or how 'twas, he did so set his
teeth and tear it; O, I warrant it, how he mammocked
it!

VOLUMNIA:
One on 's father's moods.

VALERIA:
Indeed, la, 'tis a noble child.

VIRGILIA:
A crack, madam.

VALERIA:
Come, lay aside your stitchery; I must have you play
the idle husewife with me this afternoon.

VIRGILIA:
No, good madam; I will not out of doors.

VALERIA:
Not out of doors!

VOLUMNIA:
She shall, she shall.

VIRGILIA:
Indeed, no, by your patience; I'll not over the
threshold till my lord return from the wars.

VALERIA:
Fie, you confine yourself most unreasonably: come,
you must go visit the good lady that lies in.

VIRGILIA:
I will wish her speedy strength, and visit her with
my prayers; but I cannot go thither.

VOLUMNIA:
Why, I pray you?

VIRGILIA:
'Tis not to save labour, nor that I want love.

VALERIA:
You would be another Penelope: yet, they say, all
the yarn she spun in Ulysses' absence did but fill
Ithaca full of moths. Come; I would your cambric
were sensible as your finger, that you might leave
pricking it for pity. Come, you shall go with us.

VIRGILIA:
No, good madam, pardon me; indeed, I will not forth.

VALERIA:
In truth, la, go with me; and I'll tell you
excellent news of your husband.

VIRGILIA:
O, good madam, there can be none yet.

VALERIA:
Verily, I do not jest with you; there came news from
him last night.

VIRGILIA:
Indeed, madam?

VALERIA:
In earnest, it's true; I heard a senator speak it.
Thus it is: the Volsces have an army forth; against
whom Cominius the general is gone, with one part of
our Roman power: your lord and Titus Lartius are set
down before their city Corioli; they nothing doubt
prevailing and to make it brief wars. This is true,
on mine honour; and so, I pray, go with us.

VIRGILIA:
Give me excuse, good madam; I will obey you in every
thing hereafter.

VOLUMNIA:
Let her alone, lady: as she is now, she will but
disease our better mirth.

VALERIA:
In troth, I think she would. Fare you well, then.
Come, good sweet lady. Prithee, Virgilia, turn thy
solemness out o' door. and go along with us.

VIRGILIA:
No, at a word, madam; indeed, I must not. I wish
you much mirth.

VALERIA:
Well, then, farewell.

MARCIUS:
Yonder comes news. A wager they have met.

LARTIUS:
My horse to yours, no.

MARCIUS:
'Tis done.

LARTIUS:
Agreed.

MARCIUS:
Say, has our general met the enemy?

Messenger:
They lie in view; but have not spoke as yet.

LARTIUS:
So, the good horse is mine.

MARCIUS:
I'll buy him of you.

LARTIUS:
No, I'll nor sell nor give him: lend you him I will
For half a hundred years. Summon the town.

MARCIUS:
How far off lie these armies?

Messenger:
Within this mile and half.

MARCIUS:
Then shall we hear their 'larum, and they ours.
Now, Mars, I prithee, make us quick in work,
That we with smoking swords may march from hence,
To help our fielded friends! Come, blow thy blast.
Tutus Aufidius, is he within your walls?

First Senator:
No, nor a man that fears you less than he,
That's lesser than a little.
Hark! our drums
Are bringing forth our youth. We'll break our walls,
Rather than they shall pound us up: our gates,
Which yet seem shut, we, have but pinn'd with rushes;
They'll open of themselves.
Hark you. far off!
There is Aufidius; list, what work he makes
Amongst your cloven army.

MARCIUS:
O, they are at it!

LARTIUS:
Their noise be our instruction. Ladders, ho!

MARCIUS:
They fear us not, but issue forth their city.
Now put your shields before your hearts, and fight
With hearts more proof than shields. Advance,
brave Titus:
They do disdain us much beyond our thoughts,
Which makes me sweat with wrath. Come on, my fellows:
He that retires I'll take him for a Volsce,
And he shall feel mine edge.

MARCIUS:
All the contagion of the south light on you,
You shames of Rome! you herd of--Boils and plagues
Plaster you o'er, that you may be abhorr'd
Further than seen and one infect another
Against the wind a mile! You souls of geese,
That bear the shapes of men, how have you run
From slaves that apes would beat! Pluto and hell!
All hurt behind; backs red, and faces pale
With flight and agued fear! Mend and charge home,
Or, by the fires of heaven, I'll leave the foe
And make my wars on you: look to't: come on;
If you'll stand fast, we'll beat them to their wives,
As they us to our trenches followed.
So, now the gates are ope: now prove good seconds:
'Tis for the followers fortune widens them,
Not for the fliers: mark me, and do the like.

First Soldier:
Fool-hardiness; not I.

Second Soldier:
Nor I.

First Soldier:
See, they have shut him in.

All:
To the pot, I warrant him.

LARTIUS:
What is become of Marcius?

All:
Slain, sir, doubtless.

First Soldier:
Following the fliers at the very heels,
With them he enters; who, upon the sudden,
Clapp'd to their gates: he is himself alone,
To answer all the city.

LARTIUS:
O noble fellow!
Who sensibly outdares his senseless sword,
And, when it bows, stands up. Thou art left, Marcius:
A carbuncle entire, as big as thou art,
Were not so rich a jewel. Thou wast a soldier
Even to Cato's wish, not fierce and terrible
Only in strokes; but, with thy grim looks and
The thunder-like percussion of thy sounds,
Thou madst thine enemies shake, as if the world
Were feverous and did tremble.

First Soldier:
Look, sir.

LARTIUS:
O,'tis Marcius!
Let's fetch him off, or make remain alike.

First Roman:
This will I carry to Rome.

Second Roman:
And I this.

Third Roman:
A murrain on't! I took this for silver.

MARCIUS:
See here these movers that do prize their hours
At a crack'd drachm! Cushions, leaden spoons,
Irons of a doit, doublets that hangmen would
Bury with those that wore them, these base slaves,
Ere yet the fight be done, pack up: down with them!
And hark, what noise the general makes! To him!
There is the man of my soul's hate, Aufidius,
Piercing our Romans: then, valiant Titus, take
Convenient numbers to make good the city;
Whilst I, with those that have the spirit, will haste
To help Cominius.

LARTIUS:
Worthy sir, thou bleed'st;
Thy exercise hath been too violent for
A second course of fight.

MARCIUS:
Sir, praise me not;
My work hath yet not warm'd me: fare you well:
The blood I drop is rather physical
Than dangerous to me: to Aufidius thus
I will appear, and fight.

LARTIUS:
Now the fair goddess, Fortune,
Fall deep in love with thee; and her great charms
Misguide thy opposers' swords! Bold gentleman,
Prosperity be thy page!

MARCIUS:
Thy friend no less
Than those she placeth highest! So, farewell.

LARTIUS:
Thou worthiest Marcius!
Go, sound thy trumpet in the market-place;
Call thither all the officers o' the town,
Where they shall know our mind: away!

COMINIUS:
Breathe you, my friends: well fought;
we are come off
Like Romans, neither foolish in our stands,
Nor cowardly in retire: believe me, sirs,
We shall be charged again. Whiles we have struck,
By interims and conveying gusts we have heard
The charges of our friends. Ye Roman gods!
Lead their successes as we wish our own,
That both our powers, with smiling
fronts encountering,
May give you thankful sacrifice.
Thy news?

Messenger:
The citizens of Corioli have issued,
And given to Lartius and to Marcius battle:
I saw our party to their trenches driven,
And then I came away.

COMINIUS:
Though thou speak'st truth,
Methinks thou speak'st not well.
How long is't since?

Messenger:
Above an hour, my lord.

COMINIUS:
'Tis not a mile; briefly we heard their drums:
How couldst thou in a mile confound an hour,
And bring thy news so late?

Messenger:
Spies of the Volsces
Held me in chase, that I was forced to wheel
Three or four miles about, else had I, sir,
Half an hour since brought my report.

COMINIUS:
Who's yonder,
That does appear as he were flay'd? O gods
He has the stamp of Marcius; and I have
Before-time seen him thus.

MARCIUS:

COMINIUS:
The shepherd knows not thunder from a tabour
More than I know the sound of Marcius' tongue
From every meaner man.

MARCIUS:
Come I too late?

COMINIUS:
Ay, if you come not in the blood of others,
But mantled in your own.

MARCIUS:
O, let me clip ye
In arms as sound as when I woo'd, in heart
As merry as when our nuptial day was done,
And tapers burn'd to bedward!

COMINIUS:
Flower of warriors,
How is it with Titus Lartius?

MARCIUS:
As with a man busied about decrees:
Condemning some to death, and some to exile;
Ransoming him, or pitying, threatening the other;
Holding Corioli in the name of Rome,
Even like a fawning greyhound in the leash,
To let him slip at will.

COMINIUS:
Where is that slave
Which told me they had beat you to your trenches?
Where is he? call him hither.

MARCIUS:
Let him alone;
He did inform the truth: but for our gentlemen,
The common file--a plague! tribunes for them!--
The mouse ne'er shunn'd the cat as they did budge
From rascals worse than they.

COMINIUS:
But how prevail'd you?

MARCIUS:
Will the time serve to tell? I do not think.
Where is the enemy? are you lords o' the field?
If not, why cease you till you are so?

COMINIUS:
Marcius,
We have at disadvantage fought and did
Retire to win our purpose.

MARCIUS:
How lies their battle? know you on which side
They have placed their men of trust?

COMINIUS:
As I guess, Marcius,
Their bands i' the vaward are the Antiates,
Of their best trust; o'er them Aufidius,
Their very heart of hope.

MARCIUS:
I do beseech you,
By all the battles wherein we have fought,
By the blood we have shed together, by the vows
We have made to endure friends, that you directly
Set me against Aufidius and his Antiates;
And that you not delay the present, but,
Filling the air with swords advanced and darts,
We prove this very hour.

COMINIUS:
Though I could wish
You were conducted to a gentle bath
And balms applied to, you, yet dare I never
Deny your asking: take your choice of those
That best can aid your action.

MARCIUS:
Those are they
That most are willing. If any such be here--
As it were sin to doubt--that love this painting
Wherein you see me smear'd; if any fear
Lesser his person than an ill report;
If any think brave death outweighs bad life
And that his country's dearer than himself;
Let him alone, or so many so minded,
Wave thus, to express his disposition,
And follow Marcius.
O, me alone! make you a sword of me?
If these shows be not outward, which of you
But is four Volsces? none of you but is
Able to bear against the great Aufidius
A shield as hard as his. A certain number,
Though thanks to all, must I select
from all: the rest
Shall bear the business in some other fight,
As cause will be obey'd. Please you to march;
And four shall quickly draw out my command,
Which men are best inclined.

COMINIUS:
March on, my fellows:
Make good this ostentation, and you shall
Divide in all with us.

LARTIUS:
So, let the ports be guarded: keep your duties,
As I have set them down. If I do send, dispatch
Those centuries to our aid: the rest will serve
For a short holding: if we lose the field,
We cannot keep the town.

Lieutenant:
Fear not our care, sir.

LARTIUS:
Hence, and shut your gates upon's.
Our guider, come; to the Roman camp conduct us.

MARCIUS:
I'll fight with none but thee; for I do hate thee
Worse than a promise-breaker.

AUFIDIUS:
We hate alike:
Not Afric owns a serpent I abhor
More than thy fame and envy. Fix thy foot.

MARCIUS:
Let the first budger die the other's slave,
And the gods doom him after!

AUFIDIUS:
If I fly, Marcius,
Holloa me like a hare.

MARCIUS:
Within these three hours, Tullus,
Alone I fought in your Corioli walls,
And made what work I pleased: 'tis not my blood
Wherein thou seest me mask'd; for thy revenge
Wrench up thy power to the highest.

AUFIDIUS:
Wert thou the Hector
That was the whip of your bragg'd progeny,
Thou shouldst not scape me here.
Officious, and not valiant, you have shamed me
In your condemned seconds.

COMINIUS:
If I should tell thee o'er this thy day's work,
Thou'ldst not believe thy deeds: but I'll report it
Where senators shall mingle tears with smiles,
Where great patricians shall attend and shrug,
I' the end admire, where ladies shall be frighted,
And, gladly quaked, hear more; where the
dull tribunes,
That, with the fusty plebeians, hate thine honours,
Shall say against their hearts 'We thank the gods
Our Rome hath such a soldier.'
Yet camest thou to a morsel of this feast,
Having fully dined before.

LARTIUS:
O general,
Here is the steed, we the caparison:
Hadst thou beheld--

MARCIUS:
Pray now, no more: my mother,
Who has a charter to extol her blood,
When she does praise me grieves me. I have done
As you have done; that's what I can; induced
As you have been; that's for my country:
He that has but effected his good will
Hath overta'en mine act.

COMINIUS:
You shall not be
The grave of your deserving; Rome must know
The value of her own: 'twere a concealment
Worse than a theft, no less than a traducement,
To hide your doings; and to silence that,
Which, to the spire and top of praises vouch'd,
Would seem but modest: therefore, I beseech you
In sign of what you are, not to reward
What you have done--before our army hear me.

MARCIUS:
I have some wounds upon me, and they smart
To hear themselves remember'd.

COMINIUS:
Should they not,
Well might they fester 'gainst ingratitude,
And tent themselves with death. Of all the horses,
Whereof we have ta'en good and good store, of all
The treasure in this field achieved and city,
We render you the tenth, to be ta'en forth,
Before the common distribution, at
Your only choice.

MARCIUS:
I thank you, general;
But cannot make my heart consent to take
A bribe to pay my sword: I do refuse it;
And stand upon my common part with those
That have beheld the doing.

MARCIUS:
May these same instruments, which you profane,
Never sound more! when drums and trumpets shall
I' the field prove flatterers, let courts and cities be
Made all of false-faced soothing!
When steel grows soft as the parasite's silk,
Let him be made a coverture for the wars!
No more, I say! For that I have not wash'd
My nose that bled, or foil'd some debile wretch.--
Which, without note, here's many else have done,--
You shout me forth
In acclamations hyperbolical;
As if I loved my little should be dieted
In praises sauced with lies.

COMINIUS:
Too modest are you;
More cruel to your good report than grateful
To us that give you truly: by your patience,
If 'gainst yourself you be incensed, we'll put you,
Like one that means his proper harm, in manacles,
Then reason safely with you. Therefore, be it known,
As to us, to all the world, that Caius Marcius
Wears this war's garland: in token of the which,
My noble steed, known to the camp, I give him,
With all his trim belonging; and from this time,
For what he did before Corioli, call him,
With all the applause and clamour of the host,
CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS! Bear
The addition nobly ever!

All:
Caius Marcius Coriolanus!

CORIOLANUS:
I will go wash;
And when my face is fair, you shall perceive
Whether I blush or no: howbeit, I thank you.
I mean to stride your steed, and at all times
To undercrest your good addition
To the fairness of my power.

COMINIUS:
So, to our tent;
Where, ere we do repose us, we will write
To Rome of our success. You, Titus Lartius,
Must to Corioli back: send us to Rome
The best, with whom we may articulate,
For their own good and ours.

LARTIUS:
I shall, my lord.

CORIOLANUS:
The gods begin to mock me. I, that now
Refused most princely gifts, am bound to beg
Of my lord general.

COMINIUS:
Take't; 'tis yours. What is't?

CORIOLANUS:
I sometime lay here in Corioli
At a poor man's house; he used me kindly:
He cried to me; I saw him prisoner;
But then Aufidius was within my view,
And wrath o'erwhelm'd my pity: I request you
To give my poor host freedom.

COMINIUS:
O, well begg'd!
Were he the butcher of my son, he should
Be free as is the wind. Deliver him, Titus.

LARTIUS:
Marcius, his name?

CORIOLANUS:
By Jupiter! forgot.
I am weary; yea, my memory is tired.
Have we no wine here?

COMINIUS:
Go we to our tent:
The blood upon your visage dries; 'tis time
It should be look'd to: come.

AUFIDIUS:
The town is ta'en!

First Soldier:
'Twill be deliver'd back on good condition.

AUFIDIUS:
Condition!
I would I were a Roman; for I cannot,
Being a Volsce, be that I am. Condition!
What good condition can a treaty find
I' the part that is at mercy? Five times, Marcius,
I have fought with thee: so often hast thou beat me,
And wouldst do so, I think, should we encounter
As often as we eat. By the elements,
If e'er again I meet him beard to beard,
He's mine, or I am his: mine emulation
Hath not that honour in't it had; for where
I thought to crush him in an equal force,
True sword to sword, I'll potch at him some way
Or wrath or craft may get him.

First Soldier:
He's the devil.

AUFIDIUS:
Bolder, though not so subtle. My valour's poison'd
With only suffering stain by him; for him
Shall fly out of itself: nor sleep nor sanctuary,
Being naked, sick, nor fane nor Capitol,
The prayers of priests nor times of sacrifice,
Embarquements all of fury, shall lift up
Their rotten privilege and custom 'gainst
My hate to Marcius: where I find him, were it
At home, upon my brother's guard, even there,
Against the hospitable canon, would I
Wash my fierce hand in's heart. Go you to the city;
Learn how 'tis held; and what they are that must
Be hostages for Rome.

First Soldier:
Will not you go?

AUFIDIUS:
I am attended at the cypress grove: I pray you--
'Tis south the city mills--bring me word thither
How the world goes, that to the pace of it
I may spur on my journey.

First Soldier:
I shall, sir.

MENENIUS:
The augurer tells me we shall have news to-night.

BRUTUS:
Good or bad?

MENENIUS:
Not according to the prayer of the people, for they
love not Marcius.

SICINIUS:
Nature teaches beasts to know their friends.

MENENIUS:
Pray you, who does the wolf love?

SICINIUS:
The lamb.

MENENIUS:
Ay, to devour him; as the hungry plebeians would the
noble Marcius.

BRUTUS:
He's a lamb indeed, that baes like a bear.

MENENIUS:
He's a bear indeed, that lives like a lamb. You two
are old men: tell me one thing that I shall ask you.

Both:
Well, sir.

MENENIUS:
In what enormity is Marcius poor in, that you two
have not in abundance?

BRUTUS:
He's poor in no one fault, but stored with all.

SICINIUS:
Especially in pride.

BRUTUS:
And topping all others in boasting.

MENENIUS:
This is strange now: do you two know how you are
censured here in the city, I mean of us o' the
right-hand file? do you?

Both:
Why, how are we censured?

MENENIUS:
Because you talk of pride now,--will you not be angry?

Both:
Well, well, sir, well.

MENENIUS:
Why, 'tis no great matter; for a very little thief of
occasion will rob you of a great deal of patience:
give your dispositions the reins, and be angry at
your pleasures; at the least if you take it as a
pleasure to you in being so. You blame Marcius for
being proud?

BRUTUS:
We do it not alone, sir.

MENENIUS:
I know you can do very little alone; for your helps
are many, or else your actions would grow wondrous
single: your abilities are too infant-like for
doing much alone. You talk of pride: O that you
could turn your eyes toward the napes of your necks,
and make but an interior survey of your good selves!
O that you could!

BRUTUS:
What then, sir?

MENENIUS:
Why, then you should discover a brace of unmeriting,
proud, violent, testy magistrates, alias fools, as
any in Rome.

SICINIUS:
Menenius, you are known well enough too.

MENENIUS:
I am known to be a humorous patrician, and one that
loves a cup of hot wine with not a drop of allaying
Tiber in't; said to be something imperfect in
favouring the first complaint; hasty and tinder-like
upon too trivial motion; one that converses more
with the buttock of the night than with the forehead
of the morning: what I think I utter, and spend my
malice in my breath. Meeting two such wealsmen as
you are--I cannot call you Lycurguses--if the drink
you give me touch my palate adversely, I make a
crooked face at it. I can't say your worships have
delivered the matter well, when I find the ass in
compound with the major part of your syllables: and
though I must be content to bear with those that say
you are reverend grave men, yet they lie deadly that
tell you you have good faces. If you see this in
the map of my microcosm, follows it that I am known
well enough too? what barm can your bisson
conspectuities glean out of this character, if I be
known well enough too?

BRUTUS:
Come, sir, come, we know you well enough.

MENENIUS:
You know neither me, yourselves nor any thing. You
are ambitious for poor knaves' caps and legs: you
wear out a good wholesome forenoon in hearing a
cause between an orange wife and a fosset-seller;
and then rejourn the controversy of three pence to a
second day of audience. When you are hearing a
matter between party and party, if you chance to be
pinched with the colic, you make faces like
mummers; set up the bloody flag against all
patience; and, in roaring for a chamber-pot,
dismiss the controversy bleeding the more entangled
by your hearing: all the peace you make in their
cause is, calling both the parties knaves. You are
a pair of strange ones.

BRUTUS:
Come, come, you are well understood to be a
perfecter giber for the table than a necessary
bencher in the Capitol.

MENENIUS:
Our very priests must become mockers, if they shall
encounter such ridiculous subjects as you are. When
you speak best unto the purpose, it is not worth the
wagging of your beards; and your beards deserve not
so honourable a grave as to stuff a botcher's
cushion, or to be entombed in an ass's pack-
saddle. Yet you must be saying, Marcius is proud;
who in a cheap estimation, is worth predecessors
since Deucalion, though peradventure some of the
best of 'em were hereditary hangmen. God-den to
your worships: more of your conversation would
infect my brain, being the herdsmen of the beastly
plebeians: I will be bold to take my leave of you.
How now, my as fair as noble ladies,--and the moon,
were she earthly, no nobler,--whither do you follow
your eyes so fast?

VOLUMNIA:
Honourable Menenius, my boy Marcius approaches; for
the love of Juno, let's go.

MENENIUS:
Ha! Marcius coming home!

VOLUMNIA:
Ay, worthy Menenius; and with most prosperous
approbation.

MENENIUS:
Take my cap, Jupiter, and I thank thee. Hoo!
Marcius coming home!

VOLUMNIA:
Nay,'tis true.

VOLUMNIA:
Look, here's a letter from him: the state hath
another, his wife another; and, I think, there's one
at home for you.

MENENIUS:
I will make my very house reel tonight: a letter for
me!

VIRGILIA:
Yes, certain, there's a letter for you; I saw't.

MENENIUS:
A letter for me! it gives me an estate of seven
years' health; in which time I will make a lip at
the physician: the most sovereign prescription in
Galen is but empiricutic, and, to this preservative,
of no better report than a horse-drench. Is he
not wounded? he was wont to come home wounded.

VIRGILIA:
O, no, no, no.

VOLUMNIA:
O, he is wounded; I thank the gods for't.

MENENIUS:
So do I too, if it be not too much: brings a'
victory in his pocket? the wounds become him.

VOLUMNIA:
On's brows: Menenius, he comes the third time home
with the oaken garland.

MENENIUS:
Has he disciplined Aufidius soundly?

VOLUMNIA:
Titus Lartius writes, they fought together, but
Aufidius got off.

MENENIUS:
And 'twas time for him too, I'll warrant him that:
an he had stayed by him, I would not have been so
fidiused for all the chests in Corioli, and the gold
that's in them. Is the senate possessed of this?

VOLUMNIA:
Good ladies, let's go. Yes, yes, yes; the senate
has letters from the general, wherein he gives my
son the whole name of the war: he hath in this
action outdone his former deeds doubly

VALERIA:
In troth, there's wondrous things spoke of him.

MENENIUS:
Wondrous! ay, I warrant you, and not without his
true purchasing.

VIRGILIA:
The gods grant them true!

VOLUMNIA:
True! pow, wow.

MENENIUS:
True! I'll be sworn they are true.
Where is he wounded?
God save your good worships! Marcius is coming
home: he has more cause to be proud. Where is he wounded?

VOLUMNIA:
I' the shoulder and i' the left arm there will be
large cicatrices to show the people, when he shall
stand for his place. He received in the repulse of
Tarquin seven hurts i' the body.

MENENIUS:
One i' the neck, and two i' the thigh,--there's
nine that I know.

VOLUMNIA:
He had, before this last expedition, twenty-five
wounds upon him.

MENENIUS:
Now it's twenty-seven: every gash was an enemy's grave.
Hark! the trumpets.

VOLUMNIA:
These are the ushers of Marcius: before him he
carries noise, and behind him he leaves tears:
Death, that dark spirit, in 's nervy arm doth lie;
Which, being advanced, declines, and then men die.

Herald:
Know, Rome, that all alone Marcius did fight
Within Corioli gates: where he hath won,
With fame, a name to Caius Marcius; these
In honour follows Coriolanus.
Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus!

All:
Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus!

CORIOLANUS:
No more of this; it does offend my heart:
Pray now, no more.

COMINIUS:
Look, sir, your mother!

CORIOLANUS:
O,
You have, I know, petition'd all the gods
For my prosperity!

VOLUMNIA:
Nay, my good soldier, up;
My gentle Marcius, worthy Caius, and
By deed-achieving honour newly named,--
What is it?--Coriolanus must I call thee?--
But O, thy wife!

CORIOLANUS:
My gracious silence, hail!
Wouldst thou have laugh'd had I come coffin'd home,
That weep'st to see me triumph? Ay, my dear,
Such eyes the widows in Corioli wear,
And mothers that lack sons.

MENENIUS:
Now, the gods crown thee!

CORIOLANUS:
And live you yet?
O my sweet lady, pardon.

VOLUMNIA:
I know not where to turn: O, welcome home:
And welcome, general: and ye're welcome all.

MENENIUS:
A hundred thousand welcomes. I could weep
And I could laugh, I am light and heavy. Welcome.
A curse begin at very root on's heart,
That is not glad to see thee! You are three
That Rome should dote on: yet, by the faith of men,
We have some old crab-trees here
at home that will not
Be grafted to your relish. Yet welcome, warriors:
We call a nettle but a nettle and
The faults of fools but folly.

COMINIUS:
Ever right.

CORIOLANUS:
Menenius ever, ever.

Herald:
Give way there, and go on!

CORIOLANUS:

VOLUMNIA:
I have lived
To see inherited my very wishes
And the buildings of my fancy: only
There's one thing wanting, which I doubt not but
Our Rome will cast upon thee.

CORIOLANUS:
Know, good mother,
I had rather be their servant in my way,
Than sway with them in theirs.

COMINIUS:
On, to the Capitol!

BRUTUS:
All tongues speak of him, and the bleared sights
Are spectacled to see him: your prattling nurse
Into a rapture lets her baby cry
While she chats him: the kitchen malkin pins
Her richest lockram 'bout her reechy neck,
Clambering the walls to eye him: stalls, bulks, windows,
Are smother'd up, leads fill'd, and ridges horsed
With variable complexions, all agreeing
In earnestness to see him: seld-shown flamens
Do press among the popular throngs and puff
To win a vulgar station: or veil'd dames
Commit the war of white and damask in
Their nicely-gawded cheeks to the wanton spoil
Of Phoebus' burning kisses: such a pother
As if that whatsoever god who leads him
Were slily crept into his human powers
And gave him graceful posture.

SICINIUS:
On the sudden,
I warrant him consul.

BRUTUS:
Then our office may,
During his power, go sleep.

SICINIUS:
He cannot temperately transport his honours
From where he should begin and end, but will
Lose those he hath won.

BRUTUS:
In that there's comfort.

SICINIUS:
Doubt not
The commoners, for whom we stand, but they
Upon their ancient malice will forget
With the least cause these his new honours, which
That he will give them make I as little question
As he is proud to do't.

BRUTUS:
I heard him swear,
Were he to stand for consul, never would he
Appear i' the market-place nor on him put
The napless vesture of humility;
Nor showing, as the manner is, his wounds
To the people, beg their stinking breaths.

SICINIUS:
'Tis right.

BRUTUS:
It was his word: O, he would miss it rather
Than carry it but by the suit of the gentry to him,
And the desire of the nobles.

SICINIUS:
I wish no better
Than have him hold that purpose and to put it
In execution.

BRUTUS:
'Tis most like he will.

SICINIUS:
It shall be to him then as our good wills,
A sure destruction.

BRUTUS:
So it must fall out
To him or our authorities. For an end,
We must suggest the people in what hatred
He still hath held them; that to's power he would
Have made them mules, silenced their pleaders and
Dispropertied their freedoms, holding them,
In human action and capacity,
Of no more soul nor fitness for the world
Than camels in the war, who have their provand
Only for bearing burdens, and sore blows
For sinking under them.

SICINIUS:
This, as you say, suggested
At some time when his soaring insolence
Shall touch the people--which time shall not want,
If he be put upon 't; and that's as easy
As to set dogs on sheep--will be his fire
To kindle their dry stubble; and their blaze
Shall darken him for ever.

BRUTUS:
What's the matter?

Messenger:
You are sent for to the Capitol. 'Tis thought
That Marcius shall be consul:
I have seen the dumb men throng to see him and
The blind to bear him speak: matrons flung gloves,
Ladies and maids their scarfs and handkerchers,
Upon him as he pass'd: the nobles bended,
As to Jove's statue, and the commons made
A shower and thunder with their caps and shouts:
I never saw the like.

BRUTUS:
Let's to the Capitol;
And carry with us ears and eyes for the time,
But hearts for the event.

SICINIUS:
Have with you.

First Officer:
Come, come, they are almost here. How many stand
for consulships?

Second Officer:
Three, they say: but 'tis thought of every one
Coriolanus will carry it.

First Officer:
That's a brave fellow; but he's vengeance proud, and
loves not the common people.

Second Officer:
Faith, there had been many great men that have
flattered the people, who ne'er loved them; and there
be many that they have loved, they know not
wherefore: so that, if they love they know not why,
they hate upon no better a ground: therefore, for
Coriolanus neither to care whether they love or hate
him manifests the true knowledge he has in their
disposition; and out of his noble carelessness lets
them plainly see't.

First Officer:
If he did not care whether he had their love or no,
he waved indifferently 'twixt doing them neither
good nor harm: but he seeks their hate with greater
devotion than can render it him; and leaves
nothing undone that may fully discover him their
opposite. Now, to seem to affect the malice and
displeasure of the people is as bad as that which he
dislikes, to flatter them for their love.

Second Officer:
He hath deserved worthily of his country: and his
ascent is not by such easy degrees as those who,
having been supple and courteous to the people,
bonneted, without any further deed to have them at
an into their estimation and report: but he hath so
planted his honours in their eyes, and his actions
in their hearts, that for their tongues to be
silent, and not confess so much, were a kind of
ingrateful injury; to report otherwise, were a
malice, that, giving itself the lie, would pluck
reproof and rebuke from every ear that heard it.

First Officer:
No more of him; he is a worthy man: make way, they
are coming.

MENENIUS:
Having determined of the Volsces and
To send for Titus Lartius, it remains,
As the main point of this our after-meeting,
To gratify his noble service that
Hath thus stood for his country: therefore,
please you,
Most reverend and grave elders, to desire
The present consul, and last general
In our well-found successes, to report
A little of that worthy work perform'd
By Caius Marcius Coriolanus, whom
We met here both to thank and to remember
With honours like himself.

First Senator:
Speak, good Cominius:
Leave nothing out for length, and make us think
Rather our state's defective for requital
Than we to stretch it out.
Masters o' the people,
We do request your kindest ears, and after,
Your loving motion toward the common body,
To yield what passes here.

SICINIUS:
We are convented
Upon a pleasing treaty, and have hearts
Inclinable to honour and advance
The theme of our assembly.

BRUTUS:
Which the rather
We shall be blest to do, if he remember
A kinder value of the people than
He hath hereto prized them at.

MENENIUS:
That's off, that's off;
I would you rather had been silent. Please you
To hear Cominius speak?

BRUTUS:
Most willingly;
But yet my caution was more pertinent
Than the rebuke you give it.

MENENIUS:
He loves your people
But tie him not to be their bedfellow.
Worthy Cominius, speak.
Nay, keep your place.

First Senator:
Sit, Coriolanus; never shame to hear
What you have nobly done.

CORIOLANUS:
Your horror's pardon:
I had rather have my wounds to heal again
Than hear say how I got them.

BRUTUS:
Sir, I hope
My words disbench'd you not.

CORIOLANUS:
No, sir: yet oft,
When blows have made me stay, I fled from words.
You soothed not, therefore hurt not: but
your people,
I love them as they weigh.

MENENIUS:
Pray now, sit down.

CORIOLANUS:
I had rather have one scratch my head i' the sun
When the alarum were struck than idly sit
To hear my nothings monster'd.

MENENIUS:
Masters of the people,
Your multiplying spawn how can he flatter--
That's thousand to one good one--when you now see
He had rather venture all his limbs for honour
Than one on's ears to hear it? Proceed, Cominius.

COMINIUS:
I shall lack voice: the deeds of Coriolanus
Should not be utter'd feebly. It is held
That valour is the chiefest virtue, and
Most dignifies the haver: if it be,
The man I speak of cannot in the world
Be singly counterpoised. At sixteen years,
When Tarquin made a head for Rome, he fought
Beyond the mark of others: our then dictator,
Whom with all praise I point at, saw him fight,
When with his Amazonian chin he drove
The bristled lips before him: be bestrid
An o'er-press'd Roman and i' the consul's view
Slew three opposers: Tarquin's self he met,
And struck him on his knee: in that day's feats,
When he might act the woman in the scene,
He proved best man i' the field, and for his meed
Was brow-bound with the oak. His pupil age
Man-enter'd thus, he waxed like a sea,
And in the brunt of seventeen battles since
He lurch'd all swords of the garland. For this last,
Before and in Corioli, let me say,
I cannot speak him home: he stopp'd the fliers;
And by his rare example made the coward
Turn terror into sport: as weeds before
A vessel under sail, so men obey'd
And fell below his stem: his sword, death's stamp,
Where it did mark, it took; from face to foot
He was a thing of blood, whose every motion
Was timed with dying cries: alone he enter'd
The mortal gate of the city, which he painted
With shunless destiny; aidless came off,
And with a sudden reinforcement struck
Corioli like a planet: now all's his:
When, by and by, the din of war gan pierce
His ready sense; then straight his doubled spirit
Re-quicken'd what in flesh was fatigate,
And to the battle came he; where he did
Run reeking o'er the lives of men, as if
'Twere a perpetual spoil: and till we call'd
Both field and city ours, he never stood
To ease his breast with panting.

MENENIUS:
Worthy man!

First Senator:
He cannot but with measure fit the honours
Which we devise him.

COMINIUS:
Our spoils he kick'd at,
And look'd upon things precious as they were
The common muck of the world: he covets less
Than misery itself would give; rewards
His deeds with doing them, and is content
To spend the time to end it.

MENENIUS:
He's right noble:
Let him be call'd for.

First Senator:
Call Coriolanus.

Officer:
He doth appear.

MENENIUS:
The senate, Coriolanus, are well pleased
To make thee consul.

CORIOLANUS:
I do owe them still
My life and services.


--- End of file: shakespear_01.txt ---


MENENIUS:
It then remains
That you do speak to the people.

CORIOLANUS:
I do beseech you,
Let me o'erleap that custom, for I cannot
Put on the gown, stand naked and entreat them,
For my wounds' sake, to give their suffrage: please you
That I may pass this doing.

SICINIUS:
Sir, the people
Must have their voices; neither will they bate
One jot of ceremony.

MENENIUS:
Put them not to't:
Pray you, go fit you to the custom and
Take to you, as your predecessors have,
Your honour with your form.

CORIOLANUS:
It is apart
That I shall blush in acting, and might well
Be taken from the people.

BRUTUS:
Mark you that?

CORIOLANUS:
To brag unto them, thus I did, and thus;
Show them the unaching scars which I should hide,
As if I had received them for the hire
Of their breath only!

MENENIUS:
Do not stand upon't.
We recommend to you, tribunes of the people,
Our purpose to them: and to our noble consul
Wish we all joy and honour.

Senators:
To Coriolanus come all joy and honour!

BRUTUS:
You see how he intends to use the people.

SICINIUS:
May they perceive's intent! He will require them,
As if he did contemn what he requested
Should be in them to give.

BRUTUS:
Come, we'll inform them
Of our proceedings here: on the marketplace,
I know, they do attend us.

First Citizen:
Once, if he do require our voices, we ought not to deny him.

Second Citizen:
We may, sir, if we will.

Third Citizen:
We have power in ourselves to do it, but it is a
power that we have no power to do; for if he show us
his wounds and tell us his deeds, we are to put our
tongues into those wounds and speak for them; so, if
he tell us his noble deeds, we must also tell him
our noble acceptance of them. Ingratitude is
monstrous, and for the multitude to be ingrateful,
were to make a monster of the multitude: of the
which we being members, should bring ourselves to be
monstrous members.

First Citizen:
And to make us no better thought of, a little help
will serve; for once we stood up about the corn, he
himself stuck not to call us the many-headed multitude.

Third Citizen:
We have been called so of many; not that our heads
are some brown, some black, some auburn, some bald,
but that our wits are so diversely coloured: and
truly I think if all our wits were to issue out of
one skull, they would fly east, west, north, south,
and their consent of one direct way should be at
once to all the points o' the compass.

Second Citizen:
Think you so? Which way do you judge my wit would
fly?

Third Citizen:
Nay, your wit will not so soon out as another man's
will;'tis strongly wedged up in a block-head, but
if it were at liberty, 'twould, sure, southward.

Second Citizen:
Why that way?

Third Citizen:
To lose itself in a fog, where being three parts
melted away with rotten dews, the fourth would return
for conscience sake, to help to get thee a wife.

Second Citizen:
You are never without your tricks: you may, you may.

Third Citizen:
Are you all resolved to give your voices? But
that's no matter, the greater part carries it. I
say, if he would incline to the people, there was
never a worthier man.
Here he comes, and in the gown of humility: mark his
behavior. We are not to stay all together, but to
come by him where he stands, by ones, by twos, and
by threes. He's to make his requests by
particulars; wherein every one of us has a single
honour, in giving him our own voices with our own
tongues: therefore follow me, and I direct you how
you shall go by him.

All:
Content, content.

MENENIUS:
O sir, you are not right: have you not known
The worthiest men have done't?

CORIOLANUS:
What must I say?
'I Pray, sir'--Plague upon't! I cannot bring
My tongue to such a pace:--'Look, sir, my wounds!
I got them in my country's service, when
Some certain of your brethren roar'd and ran
From the noise of our own drums.'

MENENIUS:
O me, the gods!
You must not speak of that: you must desire them
To think upon you.

CORIOLANUS:
Think upon me! hang 'em!
I would they would forget me, like the virtues
Which our divines lose by 'em.

MENENIUS:
You'll mar all:
I'll leave you: pray you, speak to 'em, I pray you,
In wholesome manner.

CORIOLANUS:
Bid them wash their faces
And keep their teeth clean.
So, here comes a brace.
You know the cause, air, of my standing here.

Third Citizen:
We do, sir; tell us what hath brought you to't.

CORIOLANUS:
Mine own desert.

Second Citizen:
Your own desert!

CORIOLANUS:
Ay, but not mine own desire.

Third Citizen:
How not your own desire?

CORIOLANUS:
No, sir,'twas never my desire yet to trouble the
poor with begging.

Third Citizen:
You must think, if we give you any thing, we hope to
gain by you.

CORIOLANUS:
Well then, I pray, your price o' the consulship?

First Citizen:
The price is to ask it kindly.

CORIOLANUS:
Kindly! Sir, I pray, let me ha't: I have wounds to
show you, which shall be yours in private. Your
good voice, sir; what say you?

Second Citizen:
You shall ha' it, worthy sir.

CORIOLANUS:
A match, sir. There's in all two worthy voices
begged. I have your alms: adieu.

Third Citizen:
But this is something odd.

Second Citizen:
An 'twere to give again,--but 'tis no matter.

CORIOLANUS:
Pray you now, if it may stand with the tune of your
voices that I may be consul, I have here the
customary gown.

Fourth Citizen:
You have deserved nobly of your country, and you
have not deserved nobly.

CORIOLANUS:
Your enigma?

Fourth Citizen:
You have been a scourge to her enemies, you have
been a rod to her friends; you have not indeed loved
the common people.

CORIOLANUS:
You should account me the more virtuous that I have
not been common in my love. I will, sir, flatter my
sworn brother, the people, to earn a dearer
estimation of them; 'tis a condition they account
gentle: and since the wisdom of their choice is
rather to have my hat than my heart, I will practise
the insinuating nod and be off to them most
counterfeitly; that is, sir, I will counterfeit the
bewitchment of some popular man and give it
bountiful to the desirers. Therefore, beseech you,
I may be consul.

Fifth Citizen:
We hope to find you our friend; and therefore give
you our voices heartily.

Fourth Citizen:
You have received many wounds for your country.

CORIOLANUS:
I will not seal your knowledge with showing them. I
will make much of your voices, and so trouble you no further.

Both Citizens:
The gods give you joy, sir, heartily!

CORIOLANUS:
Most sweet voices!
Better it is to die, better to starve,
Than crave the hire which first we do deserve.
Why in this woolvish toge should I stand here,
To beg of Hob and Dick, that do appear,
Their needless vouches? Custom calls me to't:
What custom wills, in all things should we do't,
The dust on antique time would lie unswept,
And mountainous error be too highly heapt
For truth to o'er-peer. Rather than fool it so,
Let the high office and the honour go
To one that would do thus. I am half through;
The one part suffer'd, the other will I do.
Here come more voices.
Your voices: for your voices I have fought;
Watch'd for your voices; for Your voices bear
Of wounds two dozen odd; battles thrice six
I have seen and heard of; for your voices have
Done many things, some less, some more your voices:
Indeed I would be consul.

Sixth Citizen:
He has done nobly, and cannot go without any honest
man's voice.

Seventh Citizen:
Therefore let him be consul: the gods give him joy,
and make him good friend to the people!

All Citizens:
Amen, amen. God save thee, noble consul!

CORIOLANUS:
Worthy voices!

MENENIUS:
You have stood your limitation; and the tribunes
Endue you with the people's voice: remains
That, in the official marks invested, you
Anon do meet the senate.

CORIOLANUS:
Is this done?

SICINIUS:
The custom of request you have discharged:
The people do admit you, and are summon'd
To meet anon, upon your approbation.

CORIOLANUS:
Where? at the senate-house?

SICINIUS:
There, Coriolanus.

CORIOLANUS:
May I change these garments?

SICINIUS:
You may, sir.

CORIOLANUS:
That I'll straight do; and, knowing myself again,
Repair to the senate-house.

MENENIUS:
I'll keep you company. Will you along?

BRUTUS:
We stay here for the people.

SICINIUS:
Fare you well.
He has it now, and by his looks methink
'Tis warm at 's heart.

BRUTUS:
With a proud heart he wore his humble weeds.
will you dismiss the people?

SICINIUS:
How now, my masters! have you chose this man?

First Citizen:
He has our voices, sir.

BRUTUS:
We pray the gods he may deserve your loves.

Second Citizen:
Amen, sir: to my poor unworthy notice,
He mock'd us when he begg'd our voices.

Third Citizen:
Certainly
He flouted us downright.

First Citizen:
No,'tis his kind of speech: he did not mock us.

Second Citizen:
Not one amongst us, save yourself, but says
He used us scornfully: he should have show'd us
His marks of merit, wounds received for's country.

SICINIUS:
Why, so he did, I am sure.

Citizens:
No, no; no man saw 'em.

Third Citizen:
He said he had wounds, which he could show
in private;
And with his hat, thus waving it in scorn,
'I would be consul,' says he: 'aged custom,
But by your voices, will not so permit me;
Your voices therefore.' When we granted that,
Here was 'I thank you for your voices: thank you:
Your most sweet voices: now you have left
your voices,
I have no further with you.' Was not this mockery?

SICINIUS:
Why either were you ignorant to see't,
Or, seeing it, of such childish friendliness
To yield your voices?

BRUTUS:
Could you not have told him
As you were lesson'd, when he had no power,
But was a petty servant to the state,
He was your enemy, ever spake against
Your liberties and the charters that you bear
I' the body of the weal; and now, arriving
A place of potency and sway o' the state,
If he should still malignantly remain
Fast foe to the plebeii, your voices might
Be curses to yourselves? You should have said
That as his worthy deeds did claim no less
Than what he stood for, so his gracious nature
Would think upon you for your voices and
Translate his malice towards you into love,
Standing your friendly lord.

SICINIUS:
Thus to have said,
As you were fore-advised, had touch'd his spirit
And tried his inclination; from him pluck'd
Either his gracious promise, which you might,
As cause had call'd you up, have held him to
Or else it would have gall'd his surly nature,
Which easily endures not article
Tying him to aught; so putting him to rage,
You should have ta'en the advantage of his choler
And pass'd him unelected.

BRUTUS:
Did you perceive
He did solicit you in free contempt
When he did need your loves, and do you think
That his contempt shall not be bruising to you,
When he hath power to crush? Why, had your bodies
No heart among you? or had you tongues to cry
Against the rectorship of judgment?

SICINIUS:
Have you
Ere now denied the asker? and now again
Of him that did not ask, but mock, bestow
Your sued-for tongues?

Third Citizen:
He's not confirm'd; we may deny him yet.

Second Citizen:
And will deny him:
I'll have five hundred voices of that sound.

First Citizen:
I twice five hundred and their friends to piece 'em.

BRUTUS:
Get you hence instantly, and tell those friends,
They have chose a consul that will from them take
Their liberties; make them of no more voice
Than dogs that are as often beat for barking
As therefore kept to do so.

SICINIUS:
Let them assemble,
And on a safer judgment all revoke
Your ignorant election; enforce his pride,
And his old hate unto you; besides, forget not
With what contempt he wore the humble weed,
How in his suit he scorn'd you; but your loves,
Thinking upon his services, took from you
The apprehension of his present portance,
Which most gibingly, ungravely, he did fashion
After the inveterate hate he bears you.

BRUTUS:
Lay
A fault on us, your tribunes; that we laboured,
No impediment between, but that you must
Cast your election on him.

SICINIUS:
Say, you chose him
More after our commandment than as guided
By your own true affections, and that your minds,
Preoccupied with what you rather must do
Than what you should, made you against the grain
To voice him consul: lay the fault on us.

BRUTUS:
Ay, spare us not. Say we read lectures to you.
How youngly he began to serve his country,
How long continued, and what stock he springs of,
The noble house o' the Marcians, from whence came
That Ancus Marcius, Numa's daughter's son,
Who, after great Hostilius, here was king;
Of the same house Publius and Quintus were,
That our beat water brought by conduits hither;
And  
Twice being  
Was his great ancestor.

SICINIUS:
One thus descended,
That hath beside well in his person wrought
To be set high in place, we did commend
To your remembrances: but you have found,
Scaling his present bearing with his past,
That he's your fixed enemy, and revoke
Your sudden approbation.

BRUTUS:
Say, you ne'er had done't--
Harp on that still--but by our putting on;
And presently, when you have drawn your number,
Repair to the Capitol.

All:
We will so: almost all
Repent in their election.

BRUTUS:
Let them go on;
This mutiny were better put in hazard,
Than stay, past doubt, for greater:
If, as his nature is, he fall in rage
With their refusal, both observe and answer
The vantage of his anger.

SICINIUS:
To the Capitol, come:
We will be there before the stream o' the people;
And this shall seem, as partly 'tis, their own,
Which we have goaded onward.

CORIOLANUS:
Tullus Aufidius then had made new head?

LARTIUS:
He had, my lord; and that it was which caused
Our swifter composition.

CORIOLANUS:
So then the Volsces stand but as at first,
Ready, when time shall prompt them, to make road.
Upon's again.

COMINIUS:
They are worn, lord consul, so,
That we shall hardly in our ages see
Their banners wave again.

CORIOLANUS:
Saw you Aufidius?

LARTIUS:
On safe-guard he came to me; and did curse
Against the Volsces, for they had so vilely
Yielded the town: he is retired to Antium.

CORIOLANUS:
Spoke he of me?

LARTIUS:
He did, my lord.

CORIOLANUS:
How? what?

LARTIUS:
How often he had met you, sword to sword;
That of all things upon the earth he hated
Your person most, that he would pawn his fortunes
To hopeless restitution, so he might
Be call'd your vanquisher.

CORIOLANUS:
At Antium lives he?

LARTIUS:
At Antium.

CORIOLANUS:
I wish I had a cause to seek him there,
To oppose his hatred fully. Welcome home.
Behold, these are the tribunes of the people,
The tongues o' the common mouth: I do despise them;
For they do prank them in authority,
Against all noble sufferance.

SICINIUS:
Pass no further.

CORIOLANUS:
Ha! what is that?

BRUTUS:
It will be dangerous to go on: no further.

CORIOLANUS:
What makes this change?

MENENIUS:
The matter?

COMINIUS:
Hath he not pass'd the noble and the common?

BRUTUS:
Cominius, no.

CORIOLANUS:
Have I had children's voices?

First Senator:
Tribunes, give way; he shall to the market-place.

BRUTUS:
The people are incensed against him.

SICINIUS:
Stop,
Or all will fall in broil.

CORIOLANUS:
Are these your herd?
Must these have voices, that can yield them now
And straight disclaim their tongues? What are
your offices?
You being their mouths, why rule you not their teeth?
Have you not set them on?

MENENIUS:
Be calm, be calm.

CORIOLANUS:
It is a purposed thing, and grows by plot,
To curb the will of the nobility:
Suffer't, and live with such as cannot rule
Nor ever will be ruled.

BRUTUS:
Call't not a plot:
The people cry you mock'd them, and of late,
When corn was given them gratis, you repined;
Scandal'd the suppliants for the people, call'd them
Time-pleasers, flatterers, foes to nobleness.

CORIOLANUS:
Why, this was known before.

BRUTUS:
Not to them all.

CORIOLANUS:
Have you inform'd them sithence?

BRUTUS:
How! I inform them!

CORIOLANUS:
You are like to do such business.

BRUTUS:
Not unlike,
Each way, to better yours.

CORIOLANUS:
Why then should I be consul? By yond clouds,
Let me deserve so ill as you, and make me
Your fellow tribune.

SICINIUS:
You show too much of that
For which the people stir: if you will pass
To where you are bound, you must inquire your way,
Which you are out of, with a gentler spirit,
Or never be so noble as a consul,
Nor yoke with him for tribune.

MENENIUS:
Let's be calm.

COMINIUS:
The people are abused; set on. This paltering
Becomes not Rome, nor has Coriolanus
Deserved this so dishonour'd rub, laid falsely
I' the plain way of his merit.

CORIOLANUS:
Tell me of corn!
This was my speech, and I will speak't again--

MENENIUS:
Not now, not now.

First Senator:
Not in this heat, sir, now.

CORIOLANUS:
Now, as I live, I will. My nobler friends,
I crave their pardons:
For the mutable, rank-scented many, let them
Regard me as I do not flatter, and
Therein behold themselves: I say again,
In soothing them, we nourish 'gainst our senate
The cockle of rebellion, insolence, sedition,
Which we ourselves have plough'd for, sow'd,
and scatter'd,
By mingling them with us, the honour'd number,
Who lack not virtue, no, nor power, but that
Which they have given to beggars.

MENENIUS:
Well, no more.

First Senator:
No more words, we beseech you.

CORIOLANUS:
How! no more!
As for my country I have shed my blood,
Not fearing outward force, so shall my lungs
Coin words till their decay against those measles,
Which we disdain should tatter us, yet sought
The very way to catch them.

BRUTUS:
You speak o' the people,
As if you were a god to punish, not
A man of their infirmity.

SICINIUS:
'Twere well
We let the people know't.

MENENIUS:
What, what? his choler?

CORIOLANUS:
Choler!
Were I as patient as the midnight sleep,
By Jove, 'twould be my mind!

SICINIUS:
It is a mind
That shall remain a poison where it is,
Not poison any further.

CORIOLANUS:
Shall remain!
Hear you this Triton of the minnows? mark you
His absolute 'shall'?

COMINIUS:
'Twas from the canon.

CORIOLANUS:
'Shall'!
O good but most unwise patricians! why,
You grave but reckless senators, have you thus
Given Hydra here to choose an officer,
That with his peremptory 'shall,' being but
The horn and noise o' the monster's, wants not spirit
To say he'll turn your current in a ditch,
And make your channel his? If he have power
Then vail your ignorance; if none, awake
Your dangerous lenity. If you are learn'd,
Be not as common fools; if you are not,
Let them have cushions by you. You are plebeians,
If they be senators: and they are no less,
When, both your voices blended, the great'st taste
Most palates theirs. They choose their magistrate,
And such a one as he, who puts his 'shall,'
His popular 'shall' against a graver bench
Than ever frown in Greece. By Jove himself!
It makes the consuls base: and my soul aches
To know, when two authorities are up,
Neither supreme, how soon confusion
May enter 'twixt the gap of both and take
The one by the other.

COMINIUS:
Well, on to the market-place.

CORIOLANUS:
Whoever gave that counsel, to give forth
The corn o' the storehouse gratis, as 'twas used
Sometime in Greece,--

MENENIUS:
Well, well, no more of that.

CORIOLANUS:
Though there the people had more absolute power,
I say, they nourish'd disobedience, fed
The ruin of the state.

BRUTUS:
Why, shall the people give
One that speaks thus their voice?

CORIOLANUS:
I'll give my reasons,
More worthier than their voices. They know the corn
Was not our recompense, resting well assured
That ne'er did service for't: being press'd to the war,
Even when the navel of the state was touch'd,
They would not thread the gates. This kind of service
Did not deserve corn gratis. Being i' the war
Their mutinies and revolts, wherein they show'd
Most valour, spoke not for them: the accusation
Which they have often made against the senate,
All cause unborn, could never be the motive
Of our so frank donation. Well, what then?
How shall this bisson multitude digest
The senate's courtesy? Let deeds express
What's like to be their words: 'we did request it;
We are the greater poll, and in true fear
They gave us our demands.' Thus we debase
The nature of our seats and make the rabble
Call our cares fears; which will in time
Break ope the locks o' the senate and bring in
The crows to peck the eagles.

MENENIUS:
Come, enough.

BRUTUS:
Enough, with over-measure.

CORIOLANUS:
No, take more:
What may be sworn by, both divine and human,
Seal what I end withal! This double worship,
Where one part does disdain with cause, the other
Insult without all reason, where gentry, title, wisdom,
Cannot conclude but by the yea and no
Of general ignorance,--it must omit
Real necessities, and give way the while
To unstable slightness: purpose so barr'd,
it follows,
Nothing is done to purpose. Therefore, beseech you,--
You that will be less fearful than discreet,
That love the fundamental part of state
More than you doubt the change on't, that prefer
A noble life before a long, and wish
To jump a body with a dangerous physic
That's sure of death without it, at once pluck out
The multitudinous tongue; let them not lick
The sweet which is their poison: your dishonour
Mangles true judgment and bereaves the state
Of that integrity which should become't,
Not having the power to do the good it would,
For the in which doth control't.

BRUTUS:
Has said enough.

SICINIUS:
Has spoken like a traitor, and shall answer
As traitors do.

CORIOLANUS:
Thou wretch, despite o'erwhelm thee!
What should the people do with these bald tribunes?
On whom depending, their obedience fails
To the greater bench: in a rebellion,
When what's not meet, but what must be, was law,
Then were they chosen: in a better hour,
Let what is meet be said it must be meet,
And throw their power i' the dust.

BRUTUS:
Manifest treason!

SICINIUS:
This a consul? no.

BRUTUS:
The aediles, ho!
Let him be apprehended.

SICINIUS:
Go, call the people:
in whose name myself
Attach thee as a traitorous innovator,
A foe to the public weal: obey, I charge thee,
And follow to thine answer.

CORIOLANUS:
Hence, old goat!

Senators, &C:
We'll surety him.

COMINIUS:
Aged sir, hands off.

CORIOLANUS:
Hence, rotten thing! or I shall shake thy bones
Out of thy garments.

SICINIUS:
Help, ye citizens!

MENENIUS:
On both sides more respect.

SICINIUS:
Here's he that would take from you all your power.

BRUTUS:
Seize him, AEdiles!

Citizens:
Down with him! down with him!

Senators, &C:
Weapons, weapons, weapons!
'Tribunes!' 'Patricians!' 'Citizens!' 'What, ho!'
'Sicinius!' 'Brutus!' 'Coriolanus!' 'Citizens!'
'Peace, peace, peace!' 'Stay, hold, peace!'

MENENIUS:
What is about to be? I am out of breath;
Confusion's near; I cannot speak. You, tribunes
To the people! Coriolanus, patience!
Speak, good Sicinius.

SICINIUS:
Hear me, people; peace!

Citizens:
Let's hear our tribune: peace Speak, speak, speak.

SICINIUS:
You are at point to lose your liberties:
Marcius would have all from you; Marcius,
Whom late you have named for consul.

MENENIUS:
Fie, fie, fie!
This is the way to kindle, not to quench.

First Senator:
To unbuild the city and to lay all flat.

SICINIUS:
What is the city but the people?

Citizens:
True,
The people are the city.

BRUTUS:
By the consent of all, we were establish'd
The people's magistrates.

Citizens:
You so remain.

MENENIUS:
And so are like to do.

COMINIUS:
That is the way to lay the city flat;
To bring the roof to the foundation,
And bury all, which yet distinctly ranges,
In heaps and piles of ruin.

SICINIUS:
This deserves death.

BRUTUS:
Or let us stand to our authority,
Or let us lose it. We do here pronounce,
Upon the part o' the people, in whose power
We were elected theirs, Marcius is worthy
Of present death.

SICINIUS:
Therefore lay hold of him;
Bear him to the rock Tarpeian, and from thence
Into destruction cast him.

BRUTUS:
AEdiles, seize him!

Citizens:
Yield, Marcius, yield!

MENENIUS:
Hear me one word;
Beseech you, tribunes, hear me but a word.

AEdile:
Peace, peace!

MENENIUS:

BRUTUS:
Sir, those cold ways,
That seem like prudent helps, are very poisonous
Where the disease is violent. Lay hands upon him,
And bear him to the rock.

CORIOLANUS:
No, I'll die here.
There's some among you have beheld me fighting:
Come, try upon yourselves what you have seen me.

MENENIUS:
Down with that sword! Tribunes, withdraw awhile.

BRUTUS:
Lay hands upon him.

COMINIUS:
Help Marcius, help,
You that be noble; help him, young and old!

Citizens:
Down with him, down with him!

MENENIUS:
Go, get you to your house; be gone, away!
All will be naught else.

Second Senator:
Get you gone.

COMINIUS:
Stand fast;
We have as many friends as enemies.

MENENIUS:
Sham it be put to that?

First Senator:
The gods forbid!
I prithee, noble friend, home to thy house;
Leave us to cure this cause.

MENENIUS:
For 'tis a sore upon us,
You cannot tent yourself: be gone, beseech you.

COMINIUS:
Come, sir, along with us.

CORIOLANUS:
I would they were barbarians--as they are,
Though in Rome litter'd--not Romans--as they are not,
Though calved i' the porch o' the Capitol--

MENENIUS:
Be gone;
Put not your worthy rage into your tongue;
One time will owe another.

CORIOLANUS:
On fair ground
I could beat forty of them.

COMINIUS:
I could myself
Take up a brace o' the best of them; yea, the
two tribunes:
But now 'tis odds beyond arithmetic;
And manhood is call'd foolery, when it stands
Against a falling fabric. Will you hence,
Before the tag return? whose rage doth rend
Like interrupted waters and o'erbear
What they are used to bear.

MENENIUS:
Pray you, be gone:
I'll try whether my old wit be in request
With those that have but little: this must be patch'd
With cloth of any colour.

COMINIUS:
Nay, come away.

A Patrician:
This man has marr'd his fortune.

MENENIUS:
His nature is too noble for the world:
He would not flatter Neptune for his trident,
Or Jove for's power to thunder. His heart's his mouth:
What his breast forges, that his tongue must vent;
And, being angry, does forget that ever
He heard the name of death.
Here's goodly work!

Second Patrician:
I would they were abed!

MENENIUS:
I would they were in Tiber! What the vengeance!
Could he not speak 'em fair?

SICINIUS:
Where is this viper
That would depopulate the city and
Be every man himself?

MENENIUS:
You worthy tribunes,--

SICINIUS:
He shall be thrown down the Tarpeian rock
With rigorous hands: he hath resisted law,
And therefore law shall scorn him further trial
Than the severity of the public power
Which he so sets at nought.

First Citizen:
He shall well know
The noble tribunes are the people's mouths,
And we their hands.

Citizens:
He shall, sure on't.

MENENIUS:
Sir, sir,--

SICINIUS:
Peace!

MENENIUS:
Do not cry havoc, where you should but hunt
With modest warrant.

SICINIUS:
Sir, how comes't that you
Have holp to make this rescue?

MENENIUS:
Hear me speak:
As I do know the consul's worthiness,
So can I name his faults,--

SICINIUS:
Consul! what consul?

MENENIUS:
The consul Coriolanus.

BRUTUS:
He consul!

Citizens:
No, no, no, no, no.

MENENIUS:
If, by the tribunes' leave, and yours, good people,
I may be heard, I would crave a word or two;
The which shall turn you to no further harm
Than so much loss of time.

SICINIUS:
Speak briefly then;
For we are peremptory to dispatch
This viperous traitor: to eject him hence
Were but one danger, and to keep him here
Our certain death: therefore it is decreed
He dies to-night.

MENENIUS:
Now the good gods forbid
That our renowned Rome, whose gratitude
Towards her deserved children is enroll'd
In Jove's own book, like an unnatural dam
Should now eat up her own!

SICINIUS:
He's a disease that must be cut away.

MENENIUS:
O, he's a limb that has but a disease;
Mortal, to cut it off; to cure it, easy.
What has he done to Rome that's worthy death?
Killing our enemies, the blood he hath lost--
Which, I dare vouch, is more than that he hath,
By many an ounce--he dropp'd it for his country;
And what is left, to lose it by his country,
Were to us all, that do't and suffer it,
A brand to the end o' the world.

SICINIUS:
This is clean kam.

BRUTUS:
Merely awry: when he did love his country,
It honour'd him.

MENENIUS:
The service of the foot
Being once gangrened, is not then respected
For what before it was.

BRUTUS:
We'll hear no more.
Pursue him to his house, and pluck him thence:
Lest his infection, being of catching nature,
Spread further.

MENENIUS:
One word more, one word.
This tiger-footed rage, when it shall find
The harm of unscann'd swiftness, will too late
Tie leaden pounds to's heels. Proceed by process;
Lest parties, as he is beloved, break out,
And sack great Rome with Romans.

BRUTUS:
If it were so,--

SICINIUS:
What do ye talk?
Have we not had a taste of his obedience?
Our aediles smote? ourselves resisted? Come.

MENENIUS:
Consider this: he has been bred i' the wars
Since he could draw a sword, and is ill school'd
In bolted language; meal and bran together
He throws without distinction. Give me leave,
I'll go to him, and undertake to bring him
Where he shall answer, by a lawful form,
In peace, to his utmost peril.

First Senator:
Noble tribunes,
It is the humane way: the other course
Will prove too bloody, and the end of it
Unknown to the beginning.

SICINIUS:
Noble Menenius,
Be you then as the people's officer.
Masters, lay down your weapons.

BRUTUS:
Go not home.

SICINIUS:
Meet on the market-place. We'll attend you there:
Where, if you bring not Marcius, we'll proceed
In our first way.

MENENIUS:
I'll bring him to you.
Let me desire your company: he must come,
Or what is worst will follow.

First Senator:
Pray you, let's to him.

CORIOLANUS:
Let them puff all about mine ears, present me
Death on the wheel or at wild horses' heels,
Or pile ten hills on the Tarpeian rock,
That the precipitation might down stretch
Below the beam of sight, yet will I still
Be thus to them.

A Patrician:
You do the nobler.

CORIOLANUS:
I muse my mother
Does not approve me further, who was wont
To call them woollen vassals, things created
To buy and sell with groats, to show bare heads
In congregations, to yawn, be still and wonder,
When one but of my ordinance stood up
To speak of peace or war.
I talk of you:
Why did you wish me milder? would you have me
False to my nature? Rather say I play
The man I am.

VOLUMNIA:
O, sir, sir, sir,
I would have had you put your power well on,
Before you had worn it out.

CORIOLANUS:
Let go.

VOLUMNIA:
You might have been enough the man you are,
With striving less to be so; lesser had been
The thwartings of your dispositions, if
You had not show'd them how ye were disposed
Ere they lack'd power to cross you.

CORIOLANUS:
Let them hang.

A Patrician:
Ay, and burn too.

MENENIUS:
Come, come, you have been too rough, something
too rough;
You must return and mend it.

First Senator:
There's no remedy;
Unless, by not so doing, our good city
Cleave in the midst, and perish.

VOLUMNIA:
Pray, be counsell'd:
I have a heart as little apt as yours,
But yet a brain that leads my use of anger
To better vantage.

MENENIUS:
Well said, noble woman?
Before he should thus stoop to the herd, but that
The violent fit o' the time craves it as physic
For the whole state, I would put mine armour on,
Which I can scarcely bear.

CORIOLANUS:
What must I do?

MENENIUS:
Return to the tribunes.

CORIOLANUS:
Well, what then? what then?

MENENIUS:
Repent what you have spoke.

CORIOLANUS:
For them! I cannot do it to the gods;
Must I then do't to them?

VOLUMNIA:
You are too absolute;
Though therein you can never be too noble,
But when extremities speak. I have heard you say,
Honour and policy, like unsever'd friends,
I' the war do grow together: grant that, and tell me,
In peace what each of them by the other lose,
That they combine not there.

CORIOLANUS:
Tush, tush!

MENENIUS:
A good demand.

VOLUMNIA:
If it be honour in your wars to seem
The same you are not, which, for your best ends,
You adopt your policy, how is it less or worse,
That it shall hold companionship in peace
With honour, as in war, since that to both
It stands in like request?

CORIOLANUS:
Why force you this?

VOLUMNIA:
Because that now it lies you on to speak
To the people; not by your own instruction,
Nor by the matter which your heart prompts you,
But with such words that are but rooted in
Your tongue, though but bastards and syllables
Of no allowance to your bosom's truth.
Now, this no more dishonours you at all
Than to take in a town with gentle words,
Which else would put you to your fortune and
The hazard of much blood.
I would dissemble with my nature where
My fortunes and my friends at stake required
I should do so in honour: I am in this,
Your wife, your son, these senators, the nobles;
And you will rather show our general louts
How you can frown than spend a fawn upon 'em,
For the inheritance of their loves and safeguard
Of what that want might ruin.

MENENIUS:
Noble lady!
Come, go with us; speak fair: you may salve so,
Not what is dangerous present, but the loss
Of what is past.

VOLUMNIA:
I prithee now, my son,
Go to them, with this bonnet in thy hand;
And thus far having stretch'd it--here be with them--
Thy knee bussing the stones--for in such business
Action is eloquence, and the eyes of the ignorant
More learned than the ears--waving thy head,
Which often, thus, correcting thy stout heart,
Now humble as the ripest mulberry
That will not hold the handling: or say to them,
Thou art their soldier, and being bred in broils
Hast not the soft way which, thou dost confess,
Were fit for thee to use as they to claim,
In asking their good loves, but thou wilt frame
Thyself, forsooth, hereafter theirs, so far
As thou hast power and person.

MENENIUS:
This but done,
Even as she speaks, why, their hearts were yours;
For they have pardons, being ask'd, as free
As words to little purpose.

VOLUMNIA:
Prithee now,
Go, and be ruled: although I know thou hadst rather
Follow thine enemy in a fiery gulf
Than flatter him in a bower. Here is Cominius.

COMINIUS:
I have been i' the market-place; and, sir,'tis fit
You make strong party, or defend yourself
By calmness or by absence: all's in anger.

MENENIUS:
Only fair speech.

COMINIUS:
I think 'twill serve, if he
Can thereto frame his spirit.

VOLUMNIA:
He must, and will
Prithee now, say you will, and go about it.

CORIOLANUS:
Must I go show them my unbarbed sconce?
Must I with base tongue give my noble heart
A lie that it must bear? Well, I will do't:
Yet, were there but this single plot to lose,
This mould of Marcius, they to dust should grind it
And throw't against the wind. To the market-place!
You have put me now to such a part which never
I shall discharge to the life.

COMINIUS:
Come, come, we'll prompt you.

VOLUMNIA:
I prithee now, sweet son, as thou hast said
My praises made thee first a soldier, so,
To have my praise for this, perform a part
Thou hast not done before.

CORIOLANUS:
Well, I must do't:
Away, my disposition, and possess me
Some harlot's spirit! my throat of war be turn'd,
Which quired with my drum, into a pipe
Small as an eunuch, or the virgin voice
That babies lulls asleep! the smiles of knaves
Tent in my cheeks, and schoolboys' tears take up
The glasses of my sight! a beggar's tongue
Make motion through my lips, and my arm'd knees,
Who bow'd but in my stirrup, bend like his
That hath received an alms! I will not do't,
Lest I surcease to honour mine own truth
And by my body's action teach my mind
A most inherent baseness.

VOLUMNIA:
At thy choice, then:
To beg of thee, it is my more dishonour
Than thou of them. Come all to ruin; let
Thy mother rather feel thy pride than fear
Thy dangerous stoutness, for I mock at death
With as big heart as thou. Do as thou list
Thy valiantness was mine, thou suck'dst it from me,
But owe thy pride thyself.

CORIOLANUS:
Pray, be content:
Mother, I am going to the market-place;
Chide me no more. I'll mountebank their loves,
Cog their hearts from them, and come home beloved
Of all the trades in Rome. Look, I am going:
Commend me to my wife. I'll return consul;
Or never trust to what my tongue can do
I' the way of flattery further.

VOLUMNIA:
Do your will.

COMINIUS:
Away! the tribunes do attend you: arm yourself
To answer mildly; for they are prepared
With accusations, as I hear, more strong
Than are upon you yet.

CORIOLANUS:
The word is 'mildly.' Pray you, let us go:
Let them accuse me by invention, I
Will answer in mine honour.

MENENIUS:
Ay, but mildly.

CORIOLANUS:
Well, mildly be it then. Mildly!

BRUTUS:
In this point charge him home, that he affects
Tyrannical power: if he evade us there,
Enforce him with his envy to the people,
And that the spoil got on the Antiates
Was ne'er distributed.
What, will he come?

AEdile:
He's coming.

BRUTUS:
How accompanied?

AEdile:
With old Menenius, and those senators
That always favour'd him.

SICINIUS:
Have you a catalogue
Of all the voices that we have procured
Set down by the poll?

AEdile:
I have; 'tis ready.

SICINIUS:
Have you collected them by tribes?

AEdile:
I have.

SICINIUS:
Assemble presently the people hither;
And when they bear me say 'It shall be so
I' the right and strength o' the commons,' be it either
For death, for fine, or banishment, then let them
If I say fine, cry 'Fine;' if death, cry 'Death.'
Insisting on the old prerogative
And power i' the truth o' the cause.

AEdile:
I shall inform them.

BRUTUS:
And when such time they have begun to cry,
Let them not cease, but with a din confused
Enforce the present execution
Of what we chance to sentence.

AEdile:
Very well.

SICINIUS:
Make them be strong and ready for this hint,
When we shall hap to give 't them.

BRUTUS:
Go about it.
Put him to choler straight: he hath been used
Ever to conquer, and to have his worth
Of contradiction: being once chafed, he cannot
Be rein'd again to temperance; then he speaks
What's in his heart; and that is there which looks
With us to break his neck.

SICINIUS:
Well, here he comes.

MENENIUS:
Calmly, I do beseech you.

CORIOLANUS:
Ay, as an ostler, that for the poorest piece
Will bear the knave by the volume. The honour'd gods
Keep Rome in safety, and the chairs of justice
Supplied with worthy men! plant love among 's!
Throng our large temples with the shows of peace,
And not our streets with war!

First Senator:
Amen, amen.

MENENIUS:
A noble wish.

SICINIUS:
Draw near, ye people.

AEdile:
List to your tribunes. Audience: peace, I say!

CORIOLANUS:
First, hear me speak.

Both Tribunes:
Well, say. Peace, ho!

CORIOLANUS:
Shall I be charged no further than this present?
Must all determine here?

SICINIUS:
I do demand,
If you submit you to the people's voices,
Allow their officers and are content
To suffer lawful censure for such faults
As shall be proved upon you?

CORIOLANUS:
I am content.

MENENIUS:
Lo, citizens, he says he is content:
The warlike service he has done, consider; think
Upon the wounds his body bears, which show
Like graves i' the holy churchyard.

CORIOLANUS:
Scratches with briers,
Scars to move laughter only.

MENENIUS:
Consider further,
That when he speaks not like a citizen,
You find him like a soldier: do not take
His rougher accents for malicious sounds,
But, as I say, such as become a soldier,
Rather than envy you.

COMINIUS:
Well, well, no more.

CORIOLANUS:
What is the matter
That being pass'd for consul with full voice,
I am so dishonour'd that the very hour
You take it off again?

SICINIUS:
Answer to us.

CORIOLANUS:
Say, then: 'tis true, I ought so.

SICINIUS:
We charge you, that you have contrived to take
From Rome all season'd office and to wind
Yourself into a power tyrannical;
For which you are a traitor to the people.

CORIOLANUS:
How! traitor!

MENENIUS:
Nay, temperately; your promise.

CORIOLANUS:
The fires i' the lowest hell fold-in the people!
Call me their traitor! Thou injurious tribune!
Within thine eyes sat twenty thousand deaths,
In thy hand clutch'd as many millions, in
Thy lying tongue both numbers, I would say
'Thou liest' unto thee with a voice as free
As I do pray the gods.

SICINIUS:
Mark you this, people?

Citizens:
To the rock, to the rock with him!

SICINIUS:
Peace!
We need not put new matter to his charge:
What you have seen him do and heard him speak,
Beating your officers, cursing yourselves,
Opposing laws with strokes and here defying
Those whose great power must try him; even this,
So criminal and in such capital kind,
Deserves the extremest death.

BRUTUS:
But since he hath
Served well for Rome,--

CORIOLANUS:
What do you prate of service?

BRUTUS:
I talk of that, that know it.

CORIOLANUS:
You?

MENENIUS:
Is this the promise that you made your mother?

COMINIUS:
Know, I pray you,--

CORIOLANUS:
I know no further:
Let them pronounce the steep Tarpeian death,
Vagabond exile, raying, pent to linger
But with a grain a day, I would not buy
Their mercy at the price of one fair word;
Nor cheque my courage for what they can give,
To have't with saying 'Good morrow.'

SICINIUS:
For that he has,
As much as in him lies, from time to time
Envied against the people, seeking means
To pluck away their power, as now at last
Given hostile strokes, and that not in the presence
Of dreaded justice, but on the ministers
That do distribute it; in the name o' the people
And in the power of us the tribunes, we,
Even from this instant, banish him our city,
In peril of precipitation
From off the rock Tarpeian never more
To enter our Rome gates: i' the people's name,
I say it shall be so.

Citizens:
It shall be so, it shall be so; let him away:
He's banish'd, and it shall be so.

COMINIUS:
Hear me, my masters, and my common friends,--

SICINIUS:
He's sentenced; no more hearing.

COMINIUS:
Let me speak:
I have been consul, and can show for Rome
Her enemies' marks upon me. I do love
My country's good with a respect more tender,
More holy and profound, than mine own life,
My dear wife's estimate, her womb's increase,
And treasure of my loins; then if I would
Speak that,--

SICINIUS:
We know your drift: speak what?

BRUTUS:
There's no more to be said, but he is banish'd,
As enemy to the people and his country:
It shall be so.

Citizens:
It shall be so, it shall be so.

CORIOLANUS:
You common cry of curs! whose breath I hate
As reek o' the rotten fens, whose loves I prize
As the dead carcasses of unburied men
That do corrupt my air, I banish you;
And here remain with your uncertainty!
Let every feeble rumour shake your hearts!
Your enemies, with nodding of their plumes,
Fan you into despair! Have the power still
To banish your defenders; till at length
Your ignorance, which finds not till it feels,
Making not reservation of yourselves,
Still your own foes, deliver you as most
Abated captives to some nation
That won you without blows! Despising,
For you, the city, thus I turn my back:
There is a world elsewhere.

AEdile:
The people's enemy is gone, is gone!

Citizens:
Our enemy is banish'd! he is gone! Hoo! hoo!

SICINIUS:
Go, see him out at gates, and follow him,
As he hath followed you, with all despite;
Give him deserved vexation. Let a guard
Attend us through the city.

Citizens:
Come, come; let's see him out at gates; come.
The gods preserve our noble tribunes! Come.

CORIOLANUS:
Come, leave your tears: a brief farewell: the beast
With many heads butts me away. Nay, mother,
Where is your ancient courage? you were used
To say extremity was the trier of spirits;
That common chances common men could bear;
That when the sea was calm all boats alike
Show'd mastership in floating; fortune's blows,
When most struck home, being gentle wounded, craves
A noble cunning: you were used to load me
With precepts that would make invincible
The heart that conn'd them.

VIRGILIA:
O heavens! O heavens!

CORIOLANUS:
Nay! prithee, woman,--

VOLUMNIA:
Now the red pestilence strike all trades in Rome,
And occupations perish!

CORIOLANUS:
What, what, what!
I shall be loved when I am lack'd. Nay, mother.
Resume that spirit, when you were wont to say,
If you had been the wife of Hercules,
Six of his labours you'ld have done, and saved
Your husband so much sweat. Cominius,
Droop not; adieu. Farewell, my wife, my mother:
I'll do well yet. Thou old and true Menenius,
Thy tears are salter than a younger man's,
And venomous to thine eyes. My sometime general,
I have seen thee stem, and thou hast oft beheld
Heart-hardening spectacles; tell these sad women
'Tis fond to wail inevitable strokes,
As 'tis to laugh at 'em. My mother, you wot well
My hazards still have been your solace: and
Believe't not lightly--though I go alone,
Like to a lonely dragon, that his fen
Makes fear'd and talk'd of more than seen--your son
Will or exceed the common or be caught
With cautelous baits and practise.

VOLUMNIA:
My first son.
Whither wilt thou go? Take good Cominius
With thee awhile: determine on some course,
More than a wild exposture to each chance
That starts i' the way before thee.

CORIOLANUS:
O the gods!

COMINIUS:
I'll follow thee a month, devise with thee
Where thou shalt rest, that thou mayst hear of us
And we of thee: so if the time thrust forth
A cause for thy repeal, we shall not send
O'er the vast world to seek a single man,
And lose advantage, which doth ever cool
I' the absence of the needer.

CORIOLANUS:
Fare ye well:
Thou hast years upon thee; and thou art too full
Of the wars' surfeits, to go rove with one
That's yet unbruised: bring me but out at gate.
Come, my sweet wife, my dearest mother, and
My friends of noble touch, when I am forth,
Bid me farewell, and smile. I pray you, come.
While I remain above the ground, you shall
Hear from me still, and never of me aught
But what is like me formerly.

MENENIUS:
That's worthily
As any ear can hear. Come, let's not weep.
If I could shake off but one seven years
From these old arms and legs, by the good gods,
I'ld with thee every foot.

CORIOLANUS:
Give me thy hand: Come.

SICINIUS:
Bid them all home; he's gone, and we'll no further.
The nobility are vex'd, whom we see have sided
In his behalf.

BRUTUS:
Now we have shown our power,
Let us seem humbler after it is done
Than when it was a-doing.

SICINIUS:
Bid them home:
Say their great enemy is gone, and they
Stand in their ancient strength.

BRUTUS:
Dismiss them home.
Here comes his mother.

SICINIUS:
Let's not meet her.

BRUTUS:
Why?

SICINIUS:
They say she's mad.

BRUTUS:
They have ta'en note of us: keep on your way.

VOLUMNIA:
O, ye're well met: the hoarded plague o' the gods
Requite your love!

MENENIUS:
Peace, peace; be not so loud.

VOLUMNIA:
If that I could for weeping, you should hear,--
Nay, and you shall hear some.
Will you be gone?

VIRGILIA:

SICINIUS:
Are you mankind?

VOLUMNIA:
Ay, fool; is that a shame? Note but this fool.
Was not a man my father? Hadst thou foxship
To banish him that struck more blows for Rome
Than thou hast spoken words?

SICINIUS:
O blessed heavens!

VOLUMNIA:
More noble blows than ever thou wise words;
And for Rome's good. I'll tell thee what; yet go:
Nay, but thou shalt stay too: I would my son
Were in Arabia, and thy tribe before him,
His good sword in his hand.

SICINIUS:
What then?

VIRGILIA:
What then!
He'ld make an end of thy posterity.

VOLUMNIA:
Bastards and all.
Good man, the wounds that he does bear for Rome!

MENENIUS:
Come, come, peace.

SICINIUS:
I would he had continued to his country
As he began, and not unknit himself
The noble knot he made.

BRUTUS:
I would he had.

VOLUMNIA:
'I would he had'! 'Twas you incensed the rabble:
Cats, that can judge as fitly of his worth
As I can of those mysteries which heaven
Will not have earth to know.

BRUTUS:
Pray, let us go.

VOLUMNIA:
Now, pray, sir, get you gone:
You have done a brave deed. Ere you go, hear this:--
As far as doth the Capitol exceed
The meanest house in Rome, so far my son--
This lady's husband here, this, do you see--
Whom you have banish'd, does exceed you all.

BRUTUS:
Well, well, we'll leave you.

SICINIUS:
Why stay we to be baited
With one that wants her wits?

VOLUMNIA:
Take my prayers with you.
I would the gods had nothing else to do
But to confirm my curses! Could I meet 'em
But once a-day, it would unclog my heart
Of what lies heavy to't.

MENENIUS:
You have told them home;
And, by my troth, you have cause. You'll sup with me?

VOLUMNIA:
Anger's my meat; I sup upon myself,
And so shall starve with feeding. Come, let's go:
Leave this faint puling and lament as I do,
In anger, Juno-like. Come, come, come.


--- End of file: shakespear_02.txt ---


MENENIUS:
Fie, fie, fie!

Roman:
I know you well, sir, and you know
me: your name, I think, is Adrian.

Volsce:
It is so, sir: truly, I have forgot you.

Roman:
I am a Roman; and my services are,
as you are, against 'em: know you me yet?

Volsce:
Nicanor? no.

Roman:
The same, sir.

Volsce:
You had more beard when I last saw you; but your
favour is well approved by your tongue. What's the
news in Rome? I have a note from the Volscian state,
to find you out there: you have well saved me a
day's journey.

Roman:
There hath been in Rome strange insurrections; the
people against the senators, patricians, and nobles.

Volsce:
Hath been! is it ended, then? Our state thinks not
so: they are in a most warlike preparation, and
hope to come upon them in the heat of their division.

Roman:
The main blaze of it is past, but a small thing
would make it flame again: for the nobles receive
so to heart the banishment of that worthy
Coriolanus, that they are in a ripe aptness to take
all power from the people and to pluck from them
their tribunes for ever. This lies glowing, I can
tell you, and is almost mature for the violent
breaking out.

Volsce:
Coriolanus banished!

Roman:
Banished, sir.

Volsce:
You will be welcome with this intelligence, Nicanor.

Roman:
The day serves well for them now. I have heard it
said, the fittest time to corrupt a man's wife is
when she's fallen out with her husband. Your noble
Tullus Aufidius will appear well in these wars, his
great opposer, Coriolanus, being now in no request
of his country.

Volsce:
He cannot choose. I am most fortunate, thus
accidentally to encounter you: you have ended my
business, and I will merrily accompany you home.

Roman:
I shall, between this and supper, tell you most
strange things from Rome; all tending to the good of
their adversaries. Have you an army ready, say you?

Volsce:
A most royal one; the centurions and their charges,
distinctly billeted, already in the entertainment,
and to be on foot at an hour's warning.

Roman:
I am joyful to hear of their readiness, and am the
man, I think, that shall set them in present action.
So, sir, heartily well met, and most glad of your company.

Volsce:
You take my part from me, sir; I have the most cause
to be glad of yours.

Roman:
Well, let us go together.

CORIOLANUS:
A goodly city is this Antium. City,
'Tis I that made thy widows: many an heir
Of these fair edifices 'fore my wars
Have I heard groan and drop: then know me not,
Lest that thy wives with spits and boys with stones
In puny battle slay me.
Save you, sir.

Citizen:
And you.

CORIOLANUS:
Direct me, if it be your will,
Where great Aufidius lies: is he in Antium?

Citizen:
He is, and feasts the nobles of the state
At his house this night.

CORIOLANUS:
Which is his house, beseech you?

Citizen:
This, here before you.

CORIOLANUS:
Thank you, sir: farewell.
O world, thy slippery turns! Friends now fast sworn,
Whose double bosoms seem to wear one heart,
Whose house, whose bed, whose meal, and exercise,
Are still together, who twin, as 'twere, in love
Unseparable, shall within this hour,
On a dissension of a doit, break out
To bitterest enmity: so, fellest foes,
Whose passions and whose plots have broke their sleep,
To take the one the other, by some chance,
Some trick not worth an egg, shall grow dear friends
And interjoin their issues. So with me:
My birth-place hate I, and my love's upon
This enemy town. I'll enter: if he slay me,
He does fair justice; if he give me way,
I'll do his country service.

First Servingman:
Wine, wine, wine! What service
is here! I think our fellows are asleep.

Second Servingman:
Where's Cotus? my master calls
for him. Cotus!

CORIOLANUS:
A goodly house: the feast smells well; but I
Appear not like a guest.

First Servingman:
What would you have, friend? whence are you?
Here's no place for you: pray, go to the door.

CORIOLANUS:
I have deserved no better entertainment,
In being Coriolanus.

Second Servingman:
Whence are you, sir? Has the porter his eyes in his
head; that he gives entrance to such companions?
Pray, get you out.

CORIOLANUS:
Away!

Second Servingman:
Away! get you away.

CORIOLANUS:
Now thou'rt troublesome.

Second Servingman:
Are you so brave? I'll have you talked with anon.

Third Servingman:
What fellow's this?

First Servingman:
A strange one as ever I looked on: I cannot get him
out of the house: prithee, call my master to him.

Third Servingman:
What have you to do here, fellow? Pray you, avoid
the house.

CORIOLANUS:
Let me but stand; I will not hurt your hearth.

Third Servingman:
What are you?

CORIOLANUS:
A gentleman.

Third Servingman:
A marvellous poor one.

CORIOLANUS:
True, so I am.

Third Servingman:
Pray you, poor gentleman, take up some other
station; here's no place for you; pray you, avoid: come.

CORIOLANUS:
Follow your function, go, and batten on cold bits.

Third Servingman:
What, you will not? Prithee, tell my master what a
strange guest he has here.

Second Servingman:
And I shall.

Third Servingman:
Where dwellest thou?

CORIOLANUS:
Under the canopy.

Third Servingman:
Under the canopy!

CORIOLANUS:
Ay.

Third Servingman:
Where's that?

CORIOLANUS:
I' the city of kites and crows.

Third Servingman:
I' the city of kites and crows! What an ass it is!
Then thou dwellest with daws too?

CORIOLANUS:
No, I serve not thy master.

Third Servingman:
How, sir! do you meddle with my master?

CORIOLANUS:
Ay; 'tis an honester service than to meddle with thy
mistress. Thou pratest, and pratest; serve with thy
trencher, hence!

AUFIDIUS:
Where is this fellow?

Second Servingman:
Here, sir: I'ld have beaten him like a dog, but for
disturbing the lords within.

AUFIDIUS:
Whence comest thou? what wouldst thou? thy name?
Why speak'st not? speak, man: what's thy name?

CORIOLANUS:
If, Tullus,
Not yet thou knowest me, and, seeing me, dost not
Think me for the man I am, necessity
Commands me name myself.

AUFIDIUS:
What is thy name?

CORIOLANUS:
A name unmusical to the Volscians' ears,
And harsh in sound to thine.

AUFIDIUS:
Say, what's thy name?
Thou hast a grim appearance, and thy face
Bears a command in't; though thy tackle's torn.
Thou show'st a noble vessel: what's thy name?

CORIOLANUS:
Prepare thy brow to frown: know'st
thou me yet?

AUFIDIUS:
I know thee not: thy name?

CORIOLANUS:
My name is Caius Marcius, who hath done
To thee particularly and to all the Volsces
Great hurt and mischief; thereto witness may
My surname, Coriolanus: the painful service,
The extreme dangers and the drops of blood
Shed for my thankless country are requited
But with that surname; a good memory,
And witness of the malice and displeasure
Which thou shouldst bear me: only that name remains;
The cruelty and envy of the people,
Permitted by our dastard nobles, who
Have all forsook me, hath devour'd the rest;
And suffer'd me by the voice of slaves to be
Whoop'd out of Rome. Now this extremity
Hath brought me to thy hearth; not out of hope--
Mistake me not--to save my life, for if
I had fear'd death, of all the men i' the world
I would have 'voided thee, but in mere spite,
To be full quit of those my banishers,
Stand I before thee here. Then if thou hast
A heart of wreak in thee, that wilt revenge
Thine own particular wrongs and stop those maims
Of shame seen through thy country, speed
thee straight,
And make my misery serve thy turn: so use it
That my revengeful services may prove
As benefits to thee, for I will fight
Against my canker'd country with the spleen
Of all the under fiends. But if so be
Thou darest not this and that to prove more fortunes
Thou'rt tired, then, in a word, I also am
Longer to live most weary, and present
My throat to thee and to thy ancient malice;
Which not to cut would show thee but a fool,
Since I have ever follow'd thee with hate,
Drawn tuns of blood out of thy country's breast,
And cannot live but to thy shame, unless
It be to do thee service.

AUFIDIUS:
O Marcius, Marcius!
Each word thou hast spoke hath weeded from my heart
A root of ancient envy. If Jupiter
Should from yond cloud speak divine things,
And say 'Tis true,' I'ld not believe them more
Than thee, all noble Marcius. Let me twine
Mine arms about that body, where against
My grained ash an hundred times hath broke
And scarr'd the moon with splinters: here I clip
The anvil of my sword, and do contest
As hotly and as nobly with thy love
As ever in ambitious strength I did
Contend against thy valour. Know thou first,
I loved the maid I married; never man
Sigh'd truer breath; but that I see thee here,
Thou noble thing! more dances my rapt heart
Than when I first my wedded mistress saw
Bestride my threshold. Why, thou Mars! I tell thee,
We have a power on foot; and I had purpose
Once more to hew thy target from thy brawn,
Or lose mine arm fort: thou hast beat me out
Twelve several times, and I have nightly since
Dreamt of encounters 'twixt thyself and me;
We have been down together in my sleep,
Unbuckling helms, fisting each other's throat,
And waked half dead with nothing. Worthy Marcius,
Had we no quarrel else to Rome, but that
Thou art thence banish'd, we would muster all
From twelve to seventy, and pouring war
Into the bowels of ungrateful Rome,
Like a bold flood o'er-bear. O, come, go in,
And take our friendly senators by the hands;
Who now are here, taking their leaves of me,
Who am prepared against your territories,
Though not for Rome itself.

CORIOLANUS:
You bless me, gods!

AUFIDIUS:
Therefore, most absolute sir, if thou wilt have
The leading of thine own revenges, take
The one half of my commission; and set down--
As best thou art experienced, since thou know'st
Thy country's strength and weakness,--thine own ways;
Whether to knock against the gates of Rome,
Or rudely visit them in parts remote,
To fright them, ere destroy. But come in:
Let me commend thee first to those that shall
Say yea to thy desires. A thousand welcomes!
And more a friend than e'er an enemy;
Yet, Marcius, that was much. Your hand: most welcome!

First Servingman:
Here's a strange alteration!

Second Servingman:
By my hand, I had thought to have strucken him with
a cudgel; and yet my mind gave me his clothes made a
false report of him.

First Servingman:
What an arm he has! he turned me about with his
finger and his thumb, as one would set up a top.

Second Servingman:
Nay, I knew by his face that there was something in
him: he had, sir, a kind of face, methought,--I
cannot tell how to term it.

First Servingman:
He had so; looking as it were--would I were hanged,
but I thought there was more in him than I could think.

Second Servingman:
So did I, I'll be sworn: he is simply the rarest
man i' the world.

First Servingman:
I think he is: but a greater soldier than he you wot on.

Second Servingman:
Who, my master?

First Servingman:
Nay, it's no matter for that.

Second Servingman:
Worth six on him.

First Servingman:
Nay, not so neither: but I take him to be the
greater soldier.

Second Servingman:
Faith, look you, one cannot tell how to say that:
for the defence of a town, our general is excellent.

First Servingman:
Ay, and for an assault too.

Third Servingman:
O slaves, I can tell you news,-- news, you rascals!

First Servingman:
What, what, what? let's partake.

Third Servingman:
I would not be a Roman, of all nations; I had as
lieve be a condemned man.

First Servingman:
Wherefore? wherefore?

Third Servingman:
Why, here's he that was wont to thwack our general,
Caius Marcius.

First Servingman:
Why do you say 'thwack our general '?

Third Servingman:
I do not say 'thwack our general;' but he was always
good enough for him.

Second Servingman:
Come, we are fellows and friends: he was ever too
hard for him; I have heard him say so himself.

First Servingman:
He was too hard for him directly, to say the troth
on't: before Corioli he scotched him and notched
him like a carbon ado.

Second Servingman:
An he had been cannibally given, he might have
broiled and eaten him too.

First Servingman:
But, more of thy news?

Third Servingman:
Why, he is so made on here within, as if he were son
and heir to Mars; set at upper end o' the table; no
question asked him by any of the senators, but they
stand bald before him: our general himself makes a
mistress of him: sanctifies himself with's hand and
turns up the white o' the eye to his discourse. But
the bottom of the news is that our general is cut i'
the middle and but one half of what he was
yesterday; for the other has half, by the entreaty
and grant of the whole table. He'll go, he says,
and sowl the porter of Rome gates by the ears: he
will mow all down before him, and leave his passage polled.

Second Servingman:
And he's as like to do't as any man I can imagine.

Third Servingman:
Do't! he will do't; for, look you, sir, he has as
many friends as enemies; which friends, sir, as it
were, durst not, look you, sir, show themselves, as
we term it, his friends whilst he's in directitude.

First Servingman:
Directitude! what's that?

Third Servingman:
But when they shall see, sir, his crest up again,
and the man in blood, they will out of their
burrows, like conies after rain, and revel all with
him.

First Servingman:
But when goes this forward?

Third Servingman:
To-morrow; to-day; presently; you shall have the
drum struck up this afternoon: 'tis, as it were, a
parcel of their feast, and to be executed ere they
wipe their lips.

Second Servingman:
Why, then we shall have a stirring world again.
This peace is nothing, but to rust iron, increase
tailors, and breed ballad-makers.

First Servingman:
Let me have war, say I; it exceeds peace as far as
day does night; it's spritely, waking, audible, and
full of vent. Peace is a very apoplexy, lethargy;
mulled, deaf, sleepy, insensible; a getter of more
bastard children than war's a destroyer of men.

Second Servingman:
'Tis so: and as war, in some sort, may be said to
be a ravisher, so it cannot be denied but peace is a
great maker of cuckolds.

First Servingman:
Ay, and it makes men hate one another.

Third Servingman:
Reason; because they then less need one another.
The wars for my money. I hope to see Romans as cheap
as Volscians. They are rising, they are rising.

All:
In, in, in, in!

SICINIUS:
We hear not of him, neither need we fear him;
His remedies are tame i' the present peace
And quietness of the people, which before
Were in wild hurry. Here do we make his friends
Blush that the world goes well, who rather had,
Though they themselves did suffer by't, behold
Dissentious numbers pestering streets than see
Our tradesmen with in their shops and going
About their functions friendly.

BRUTUS:
We stood to't in good time.
Is this Menenius?

SICINIUS:
'Tis he,'tis he: O, he is grown most kind of late.

Both Tribunes:
Hail sir!

MENENIUS:
Hail to you both!

SICINIUS:
Your Coriolanus
Is not much miss'd, but with his friends:
The commonwealth doth stand, and so would do,
Were he more angry at it.

MENENIUS:
All's well; and might have been much better, if
He could have temporized.

SICINIUS:
Where is he, hear you?

MENENIUS:
Nay, I hear nothing: his mother and his wife
Hear nothing from him.

Citizens:
The gods preserve you both!

SICINIUS:
God-den, our neighbours.

BRUTUS:
God-den to you all, god-den to you all.

First Citizen:
Ourselves, our wives, and children, on our knees,
Are bound to pray for you both.

SICINIUS:
Live, and thrive!

BRUTUS:
Farewell, kind neighbours: we wish'd Coriolanus
Had loved you as we did.

Citizens:
Now the gods keep you!

Both Tribunes:
Farewell, farewell.

SICINIUS:
This is a happier and more comely time
Than when these fellows ran about the streets,
Crying confusion.

BRUTUS:
Caius Marcius was
A worthy officer i' the war; but insolent,
O'ercome with pride, ambitious past all thinking,
Self-loving,--

SICINIUS:
And affecting one sole throne,
Without assistance.

MENENIUS:
I think not so.

SICINIUS:
We should by this, to all our lamentation,
If he had gone forth consul, found it so.

BRUTUS:
The gods have well prevented it, and Rome
Sits safe and still without him.

AEdile:
Worthy tribunes,
There is a slave, whom we have put in prison,
Reports, the Volsces with two several powers
Are enter'd in the Roman territories,
And with the deepest malice of the war
Destroy what lies before 'em.

MENENIUS:
'Tis Aufidius,
Who, hearing of our Marcius' banishment,
Thrusts forth his horns again into the world;
Which were inshell'd when Marcius stood for Rome,
And durst not once peep out.

SICINIUS:
Come, what talk you
Of Marcius?

BRUTUS:
Go see this rumourer whipp'd. It cannot be
The Volsces dare break with us.

MENENIUS:
Cannot be!
We have record that very well it can,
And three examples of the like have been
Within my age. But reason with the fellow,
Before you punish him, where he heard this,
Lest you shall chance to whip your information
And beat the messenger who bids beware
Of what is to be dreaded.

SICINIUS:
Tell not me:
I know this cannot be.

BRUTUS:
Not possible.

Messenger:
The nobles in great earnestness are going
All to the senate-house: some news is come
That turns their countenances.

SICINIUS:
'Tis this slave;--
Go whip him, 'fore the people's eyes:--his raising;
Nothing but his report.

Messenger:
Yes, worthy sir,
The slave's report is seconded; and more,
More fearful, is deliver'd.

SICINIUS:
What more fearful?

Messenger:
It is spoke freely out of many mouths--
How probable I do not know--that Marcius,
Join'd with Aufidius, leads a power 'gainst Rome,
And vows revenge as spacious as between
The young'st and oldest thing.

SICINIUS:
This is most likely!

BRUTUS:
Raised only, that the weaker sort may wish
Good Marcius home again.

SICINIUS:
The very trick on't.

MENENIUS:
This is unlikely:
He and Aufidius can no more atone
Than violentest contrariety.

Second Messenger:
You are sent for to the senate:
A fearful army, led by Caius Marcius
Associated with Aufidius, rages
Upon our territories; and have already
O'erborne their way, consumed with fire, and took
What lay before them.

COMINIUS:
O, you have made good work!

MENENIUS:
What news? what news?

COMINIUS:
You have holp to ravish your own daughters and
To melt the city leads upon your pates,
To see your wives dishonour'd to your noses,--

MENENIUS:
What's the news? what's the news?

COMINIUS:
Your temples burned in their cement, and
Your franchises, whereon you stood, confined
Into an auger's bore.

MENENIUS:
Pray now, your news?
You have made fair work, I fear me.--Pray, your news?--
If Marcius should be join'd with Volscians,--

COMINIUS:
If!
He is their god: he leads them like a thing
Made by some other deity than nature,
That shapes man better; and they follow him,
Against us brats, with no less confidence
Than boys pursuing summer butterflies,
Or butchers killing flies.

MENENIUS:
You have made good work,
You and your apron-men; you that stood so up much
on the voice of occupation and
The breath of garlic-eaters!

COMINIUS:
He will shake
Your Rome about your ears.

MENENIUS:
As Hercules
Did shake down mellow fruit.
You have made fair work!

BRUTUS:
But is this true, sir?

COMINIUS:
Ay; and you'll look pale
Before you find it other. All the regions
Do smilingly revolt; and who resist
Are mock'd for valiant ignorance,
And perish constant fools. Who is't can blame him?
Your enemies and his find something in him.

MENENIUS:
We are all undone, unless
The noble man have mercy.

COMINIUS:
Who shall ask it?
The tribunes cannot do't for shame; the people
Deserve such pity of him as the wolf
Does of the shepherds: for his best friends, if they
Should say 'Be good to Rome,' they charged him even
As those should do that had deserved his hate,
And therein show'd like enemies.

MENENIUS:
'Tis true:
If he were putting to my house the brand
That should consume it, I have not the face
To say 'Beseech you, cease.' You have made fair hands,
You and your crafts! you have crafted fair!

COMINIUS:
You have brought
A trembling upon Rome, such as was never
So incapable of help.

Both Tribunes:
Say not we brought it.

MENENIUS:
How! Was it we? we loved him but, like beasts
And cowardly nobles, gave way unto your clusters,
Who did hoot him out o' the city.

COMINIUS:
But I fear
They'll roar him in again. Tullus Aufidius,
The second name of men, obeys his points
As if he were his officer: desperation
Is all the policy, strength and defence,
That Rome can make against them.

MENENIUS:
Here come the clusters.
And is Aufidius with him? You are they
That made the air unwholesome, when you cast
Your stinking greasy caps in hooting at
Coriolanus' exile. Now he's coming;
And not a hair upon a soldier's head
Which will not prove a whip: as many coxcombs
As you threw caps up will he tumble down,
And pay you for your voices. 'Tis no matter;
if he could burn us all into one coal,
We have deserved it.

Citizens:
Faith, we hear fearful news.

First Citizen:
For mine own part,
When I said, banish him, I said 'twas pity.

Second Citizen:
And so did I.

Third Citizen:
And so did I; and, to say the truth, so did very
many of us: that we did, we did for the best; and
though we willingly consented to his banishment, yet
it was against our will.

COMINIUS:
Ye re goodly things, you voices!

MENENIUS:
You have made
Good work, you and your cry! Shall's to the Capitol?

COMINIUS:
O, ay, what else?

SICINIUS:
Go, masters, get you home; be not dismay'd:
These are a side that would be glad to have
This true which they so seem to fear. Go home,
And show no sign of fear.

First Citizen:
The gods be good to us! Come, masters, let's home.
I ever said we were i' the wrong when we banished
him.

Second Citizen:
So did we all. But, come, let's home.

BRUTUS:
I do not like this news.

SICINIUS:
Nor I.

BRUTUS:
Let's to the Capitol. Would half my wealth
Would buy this for a lie!

SICINIUS:
Pray, let us go.

AUFIDIUS:
Do they still fly to the Roman?

Lieutenant:
I do not know what witchcraft's in him, but
Your soldiers use him as the grace 'fore meat,
Their talk at table, and their thanks at end;
And you are darken'd in this action, sir,
Even by your own.

AUFIDIUS:
I cannot help it now,
Unless, by using means, I lame the foot
Of our design. He bears himself more proudlier,
Even to my person, than I thought he would
When first I did embrace him: yet his nature
In that's no changeling; and I must excuse
What cannot be amended.

Lieutenant:
Yet I wish, sir,--
I mean for your particular,--you had not
Join'd in commission with him; but either
Had borne the action of yourself, or else
To him had left it solely.

AUFIDIUS:
I understand thee well; and be thou sure,
when he shall come to his account, he knows not
What I can urge against him. Although it seems,
And so he thinks, and is no less apparent
To the vulgar eye, that he bears all things fairly.
And shows good husbandry for the Volscian state,
Fights dragon-like, and does achieve as soon
As draw his sword; yet he hath left undone
That which shall break his neck or hazard mine,
Whene'er we come to our account.

Lieutenant:
Sir, I beseech you, think you he'll carry Rome?

AUFIDIUS:
All places yield to him ere he sits down;
And the nobility of Rome are his:
The senators and patricians love him too:
The tribunes are no soldiers; and their people
Will be as rash in the repeal, as hasty
To expel him thence. I think he'll be to Rome
As is the osprey to the fish, who takes it
By sovereignty of nature. First he was
A noble servant to them; but he could not
Carry his honours even: whether 'twas pride,
Which out of daily fortune ever taints
The happy man; whether defect of judgment,
To fail in the disposing of those chances
Which he was lord of; or whether nature,
Not to be other than one thing, not moving
From the casque to the cushion, but commanding peace
Even with the same austerity and garb
As he controll'd the war; but one of these--
As he hath spices of them all, not all,
For I dare so far free him--made him fear'd,
So hated, and so banish'd: but he has a merit,
To choke it in the utterance. So our virtues
Lie in the interpretation of the time:
And power, unto itself most commendable,
Hath not a tomb so evident as a chair
To extol what it hath done.
One fire drives out one fire; one nail, one nail;
Rights by rights falter, strengths by strengths do fail.
Come, let's away. When, Caius, Rome is thine,
Thou art poor'st of all; then shortly art thou mine.

MENENIUS:
No, I'll not go: you hear what he hath said
Which was sometime his general; who loved him
In a most dear particular. He call'd me father:
But what o' that? Go, you that banish'd him;
A mile before his tent fall down, and knee
The way into his mercy: nay, if he coy'd
To hear Cominius speak, I'll keep at home.

COMINIUS:
He would not seem to know me.

MENENIUS:
Do you hear?

COMINIUS:
Yet one time he did call me by my name:
I urged our old acquaintance, and the drops
That we have bled together. Coriolanus
He would not answer to: forbad all names;
He was a kind of nothing, titleless,
Till he had forged himself a name o' the fire
Of burning Rome.

MENENIUS:
Why, so: you have made good work!
A pair of tribunes that have rack'd for Rome,
To make coals cheap,--a noble memory!

COMINIUS:
I minded him how royal 'twas to pardon
When it was less expected: he replied,
It was a bare petition of a state
To one whom they had punish'd.

MENENIUS:
Very well:
Could he say less?

COMINIUS:
I offer'd to awaken his regard
For's private friends: his answer to me was,
He could not stay to pick them in a pile
Of noisome musty chaff: he said 'twas folly,
For one poor grain or two, to leave unburnt,
And still to nose the offence.

MENENIUS:
For one poor grain or two!
I am one of those; his mother, wife, his child,
And this brave fellow too, we are the grains:
You are the musty chaff; and you are smelt
Above the moon: we must be burnt for you.

SICINIUS:
Nay, pray, be patient: if you refuse your aid
In this so never-needed help, yet do not
Upbraid's with our distress. But, sure, if you
Would be your country's pleader, your good tongue,
More than the instant army we can make,
Might stop our countryman.

MENENIUS:
No, I'll not meddle.

SICINIUS:
Pray you, go to him.

MENENIUS:
What should I do?

BRUTUS:
Only make trial what your love can do
For Rome, towards Marcius.

MENENIUS:
Well, and say that Marcius
Return me, as Cominius is return'd,
Unheard; what then?
But as a discontented friend, grief-shot
With his unkindness? say't be so?

SICINIUS:
Yet your good will
must have that thanks from Rome, after the measure
As you intended well.

MENENIUS:
I'll undertake 't:
I think he'll hear me. Yet, to bite his lip
And hum at good Cominius, much unhearts me.
He was not taken well; he had not dined:
The veins unfill'd, our blood is cold, and then
We pout upon the morning, are unapt
To give or to forgive; but when we have stuff'd
These and these conveyances of our blood
With wine and feeding, we have suppler souls
Than in our priest-like fasts: therefore I'll watch him
Till he be dieted to my request,
And then I'll set upon him.

BRUTUS:
You know the very road into his kindness,
And cannot lose your way.

MENENIUS:
Good faith, I'll prove him,
Speed how it will. I shall ere long have knowledge
Of my success.

COMINIUS:
He'll never hear him.

SICINIUS:
Not?

COMINIUS:
I tell you, he does sit in gold, his eye
Red as 'twould burn Rome; and his injury
The gaoler to his pity. I kneel'd before him;
'Twas very faintly he said 'Rise;' dismiss'd me
Thus, with his speechless hand: what he would do,
He sent in writing after me; what he would not,
Bound with an oath to yield to his conditions:
So that all hope is vain.
Unless his noble mother, and his wife;
Who, as I hear, mean to solicit him
For mercy to his country. Therefore, let's hence,
And with our fair entreaties haste them on.

First Senator:
Stay: whence are you?

Second Senator:
Stand, and go back.

MENENIUS:
You guard like men; 'tis well: but, by your leave,
I am an officer of state, and come
To speak with Coriolanus.

First Senator:
From whence?

MENENIUS:
From Rome.

First Senator:
You may not pass, you must return: our general
Will no more hear from thence.

Second Senator:
You'll see your Rome embraced with fire before
You'll speak with Coriolanus.

MENENIUS:
Good my friends,
If you have heard your general talk of Rome,
And of his friends there, it is lots to blanks,
My name hath touch'd your ears it is Menenius.

First Senator:
Be it so; go back: the virtue of your name
Is not here passable.

MENENIUS:
I tell thee, fellow,
The general is my lover: I have been
The book of his good acts, whence men have read
His name unparallel'd, haply amplified;
For I have ever verified my friends,
Of whom he's chief, with all the size that verity
Would without lapsing suffer: nay, sometimes,
Like to a bowl upon a subtle ground,
I have tumbled past the throw; and in his praise
Have almost stamp'd the leasing: therefore, fellow,
I must have leave to pass.

First Senator:
Faith, sir, if you had told as many lies in his
behalf as you have uttered words in your own, you
should not pass here; no, though it were as virtuous
to lie as to live chastely. Therefore, go back.

MENENIUS:
Prithee, fellow, remember my name is Menenius,
always factionary on the party of your general.

Second Senator:
Howsoever you have been his liar, as you say you
have, I am one that, telling true under him, must
say, you cannot pass. Therefore, go back.

MENENIUS:
Has he dined, canst thou tell? for I would not
speak with him till after dinner.

First Senator:
You are a Roman, are you?

MENENIUS:
I am, as thy general is.

First Senator:
Then you should hate Rome, as he does. Can you,
when you have pushed out your gates the very
defender of them, and, in a violent popular
ignorance, given your enemy your shield, think to
front his revenges with the easy groans of old
women, the virginal palms of your daughters, or with
the palsied intercession of such a decayed dotant as
you seem to be? Can you think to blow out the
intended fire your city is ready to flame in, with
such weak breath as this? No, you are deceived;
therefore, back to Rome, and prepare for your
execution: you are condemned, our general has sworn
you out of reprieve and pardon.

MENENIUS:
Sirrah, if thy captain knew I were here, he would
use me with estimation.

Second Senator:
Come, my captain knows you not.

MENENIUS:
I mean, thy general.

First Senator:
My general cares not for you. Back, I say, go; lest
I let forth your half-pint of blood; back,--that's
the utmost of your having: back.

MENENIUS:
Nay, but, fellow, fellow,--

CORIOLANUS:
What's the matter?

MENENIUS:
Now, you companion, I'll say an errand for you:
You shall know now that I am in estimation; you shall
perceive that a Jack guardant cannot office me from
my son Coriolanus: guess, but by my entertainment
with him, if thou standest not i' the state of
hanging, or of some death more long in
spectatorship, and crueller in suffering; behold now
presently, and swoon for what's to come upon thee.
The glorious gods sit in hourly synod about thy
particular prosperity, and love thee no worse than
thy old father Menenius does! O my son, my son!
thou art preparing fire for us; look thee, here's
water to quench it. I was hardly moved to come to
thee; but being assured none but myself could move
thee, I have been blown out of your gates with
sighs; and conjure thee to pardon Rome, and thy
petitionary countrymen. The good gods assuage thy
wrath, and turn the dregs of it upon this varlet
here,--this, who, like a block, hath denied my
access to thee.

CORIOLANUS:
Away!

MENENIUS:
How! away!

CORIOLANUS:
Wife, mother, child, I know not. My affairs
Are servanted to others: though I owe
My revenge properly, my remission lies
In Volscian breasts. That we have been familiar,
Ingrate forgetfulness shall poison, rather
Than pity note how much. Therefore, be gone.
Mine ears against your suits are stronger than
Your gates against my force. Yet, for I loved thee,
Take this along; I writ it for thy sake
And would have rent it. Another word, Menenius,
I will not hear thee speak. This man, Aufidius,
Was my beloved in Rome: yet thou behold'st!

AUFIDIUS:
You keep a constant temper.

First Senator:
Now, sir, is your name Menenius?

Second Senator:
'Tis a spell, you see, of much power: you know the
way home again.

First Senator:
Do you hear how we are shent for keeping your
greatness back?

Second Senator:
What cause, do you think, I have to swoon?

MENENIUS:
I neither care for the world nor your general: for
such things as you, I can scarce think there's any,
ye're so slight. He that hath a will to die by
himself fears it not from another: let your general
do his worst. For you, be that you are, long; and
your misery increase with your age! I say to you,
as I was said to, Away!

First Senator:
A noble fellow, I warrant him.

Second Senator:
The worthy fellow is our general: he's the rock, the
oak not to be wind-shaken.

CORIOLANUS:
We will before the walls of Rome tomorrow
Set down our host. My partner in this action,
You must report to the Volscian lords, how plainly
I have borne this business.

AUFIDIUS:
Only their ends
You have respected; stopp'd your ears against
The general suit of Rome; never admitted
A private whisper, no, not with such friends
That thought them sure of you.

CORIOLANUS:
This last old man,
Whom with a crack'd heart I have sent to Rome,
Loved me above the measure of a father;
Nay, godded me, indeed. Their latest refuge
Was to send him; for whose old love I have,
Though I show'd sourly to him, once more offer'd
The first conditions, which they did refuse
And cannot now accept; to grace him only
That thought he could do more, a very little
I have yielded to: fresh embassies and suits,
Nor from the state nor private friends, hereafter
Will I lend ear to. Ha! what shout is this?
Shall I be tempted to infringe my vow
In the same time 'tis made? I will not.
My wife comes foremost; then the honour'd mould
Wherein this trunk was framed, and in her hand
The grandchild to her blood. But, out, affection!
All bond and privilege of nature, break!
Let it be virtuous to be obstinate.
What is that curt'sy worth? or those doves' eyes,
Which can make gods forsworn? I melt, and am not
Of stronger earth than others. My mother bows;
As if Olympus to a molehill should
In supplication nod: and my young boy
Hath an aspect of intercession, which
Great nature cries 'Deny not.' let the Volsces
Plough Rome and harrow Italy: I'll never
Be such a gosling to obey instinct, but stand,
As if a man were author of himself
And knew no other kin.

VIRGILIA:
My lord and husband!

CORIOLANUS:
These eyes are not the same I wore in Rome.

VIRGILIA:
The sorrow that delivers us thus changed
Makes you think so.

CORIOLANUS:
Like a dull actor now,
I have forgot my part, and I am out,
Even to a full disgrace. Best of my flesh,
Forgive my tyranny; but do not say
For that 'Forgive our Romans.' O, a kiss
Long as my exile, sweet as my revenge!
Now, by the jealous queen of heaven, that kiss
I carried from thee, dear; and my true lip
Hath virgin'd it e'er since. You gods! I prate,
And the most noble mother of the world
Leave unsaluted: sink, my knee, i' the earth;
Of thy deep duty more impression show
Than that of common sons.

VOLUMNIA:
O, stand up blest!
Whilst, with no softer cushion than the flint,
I kneel before thee; and unproperly
Show duty, as mistaken all this while
Between the child and parent.

CORIOLANUS:
What is this?
Your knees to me? to your corrected son?
Then let the pebbles on the hungry beach
Fillip the stars; then let the mutinous winds
Strike the proud cedars 'gainst the fiery sun;
Murdering impossibility, to make
What cannot be, slight work.

VOLUMNIA:
Thou art my warrior;
I holp to frame thee. Do you know this lady?

CORIOLANUS:
The noble sister of Publicola,
The moon of Rome, chaste as the icicle
That's curdied by the frost from purest snow
And hangs on Dian's temple: dear Valeria!

VOLUMNIA:
This is a poor epitome of yours,
Which by the interpretation of full time
May show like all yourself.

CORIOLANUS:
The god of soldiers,
With the consent of supreme Jove, inform
Thy thoughts with nobleness; that thou mayst prove
To shame unvulnerable, and stick i' the wars
Like a great sea-mark, standing every flaw,
And saving those that eye thee!

VOLUMNIA:
Your knee, sirrah.

CORIOLANUS:
That's my brave boy!

VOLUMNIA:
Even he, your wife, this lady, and myself,
Are suitors to you.

CORIOLANUS:
I beseech you, peace:
Or, if you'ld ask, remember this before:
The thing I have forsworn to grant may never
Be held by you denials. Do not bid me
Dismiss my soldiers, or capitulate
Again with Rome's mechanics: tell me not
Wherein I seem unnatural: desire not
To ally my rages and revenges with
Your colder reasons.

VOLUMNIA:
O, no more, no more!
You have said you will not grant us any thing;
For we have nothing else to ask, but that
Which you deny already: yet we will ask;
That, if you fail in our request, the blame
May hang upon your hardness: therefore hear us.

CORIOLANUS:
Aufidius, and you Volsces, mark; for we'll
Hear nought from Rome in private. Your request?

VOLUMNIA:
Should we be silent and not speak, our raiment
And state of bodies would bewray what life
We have led since thy exile. Think with thyself
How more unfortunate than all living women
Are we come hither: since that thy sight,
which should
Make our eyes flow with joy, hearts dance
with comforts,
Constrains them weep and shake with fear and sorrow;
Making the mother, wife and child to see
The son, the husband and the father tearing
His country's bowels out. And to poor we
Thine enmity's most capital: thou barr'st us
Our prayers to the gods, which is a comfort
That all but we enjoy; for how can we,
Alas, how can we for our country pray.
Whereto we are bound, together with thy victory,
Whereto we are bound? alack, or we must lose
The country, our dear nurse, or else thy person,
Our comfort in the country. We must find
An evident calamity, though we had
Our wish, which side should win: for either thou
Must, as a foreign recreant, be led
With manacles thorough our streets, or else
triumphantly tread on thy country's ruin,
And bear the palm for having bravely shed
Thy wife and children's blood. For myself, son,
I purpose not to wait on fortune till
These wars determine: if I cannot persuade thee
Rather to show a noble grace to both parts
Than seek the end of one, thou shalt no sooner
March to assault thy country than to tread--
Trust to't, thou shalt not--on thy mother's womb,
That brought thee to this world.

VIRGILIA:
Ay, and mine,
That brought you forth this boy, to keep your name
Living to time.

Young MARCIUS:
A' shall not tread on me;
I'll run away till I am bigger, but then I'll fight.

CORIOLANUS:
Not of a woman's tenderness to be,
Requires nor child nor woman's face to see.
I have sat too long.

VOLUMNIA:
Nay, go not from us thus.
If it were so that our request did tend
To save the Romans, thereby to destroy
The Volsces whom you serve, you might condemn us,
As poisonous of your honour: no; our suit
Is that you reconcile them: while the Volsces
May say 'This mercy we have show'd;' the Romans,
'This we received;' and each in either side
Give the all-hail to thee and cry 'Be blest
For making up this peace!' Thou know'st, great son,
The end of war's uncertain, but this certain,
That, if thou conquer Rome, the benefit
Which thou shalt thereby reap is such a name,
Whose repetition will be dogg'd with curses;
Whose chronicle thus writ: 'The man was noble,
But with his last attempt he wiped it out;
Destroy'd his country, and his name remains
To the ensuing age abhorr'd.' Speak to me, son:
Thou hast affected the fine strains of honour,
To imitate the graces of the gods;
To tear with thunder the wide cheeks o' the air,
And yet to charge thy sulphur with a bolt
That should but rive an oak. Why dost not speak?
Think'st thou it honourable for a noble man
Still to remember wrongs? Daughter, speak you:
He cares not for your weeping. Speak thou, boy:
Perhaps thy childishness will move him more
Than can our reasons. There's no man in the world
More bound to 's mother; yet here he lets me prate
Like one i' the stocks. Thou hast never in thy life
Show'd thy dear mother any courtesy,
When she, poor hen, fond of no second brood,
Has cluck'd thee to the wars and safely home,
Loaden with honour. Say my request's unjust,
And spurn me back: but if it be not so,
Thou art not honest; and the gods will plague thee,
That thou restrain'st from me the duty which
To a mother's part belongs. He turns away:
Down, ladies; let us shame him with our knees.
To his surname Coriolanus 'longs more pride
Than pity to our prayers. Down: an end;
This is the last: so we will home to Rome,
And die among our neighbours. Nay, behold 's:
This boy, that cannot tell what he would have
But kneels and holds up bands for fellowship,
Does reason our petition with more strength
Than thou hast to deny 't. Come, let us go:
This fellow had a Volscian to his mother;
His wife is in Corioli and his child
Like him by chance. Yet give us our dispatch:
I am hush'd until our city be a-fire,
And then I'll speak a little.

CORIOLANUS:
O mother, mother!
What have you done? Behold, the heavens do ope,
The gods look down, and this unnatural scene
They laugh at. O my mother, mother! O!
You have won a happy victory to Rome;
But, for your son,--believe it, O, believe it,
Most dangerously you have with him prevail'd,
If not most mortal to him. But, let it come.
Aufidius, though I cannot make true wars,
I'll frame convenient peace. Now, good Aufidius,
Were you in my stead, would you have heard
A mother less? or granted less, Aufidius?

AUFIDIUS:
I was moved withal.

CORIOLANUS:
I dare be sworn you were:
And, sir, it is no little thing to make
Mine eyes to sweat compassion. But, good sir,
What peace you'll make, advise me: for my part,
I'll not to Rome, I'll back with you; and pray you,
Stand to me in this cause. O mother! wife!

AUFIDIUS:

CORIOLANUS:
Ay, by and by;
But we will drink together; and you shall bear
A better witness back than words, which we,
On like conditions, will have counter-seal'd.
Come, enter with us. Ladies, you deserve
To have a temple built you: all the swords
In Italy, and her confederate arms,
Could not have made this peace.

MENENIUS:
See you yond coign o' the Capitol, yond
corner-stone?

SICINIUS:
Why, what of that?

MENENIUS:
If it be possible for you to displace it with your
little finger, there is some hope the ladies of
Rome, especially his mother, may prevail with him.
But I say there is no hope in't: our throats are
sentenced and stay upon execution.

SICINIUS:
Is't possible that so short a time can alter the
condition of a man!

MENENIUS:
There is differency between a grub and a butterfly;
yet your butterfly was a grub. This Marcius is grown
from man to dragon: he has wings; he's more than a
creeping thing.

SICINIUS:
He loved his mother dearly.

MENENIUS:
So did he me: and he no more remembers his mother
now than an eight-year-old horse. The tartness
of his face sours ripe grapes: when he walks, he
moves like an engine, and the ground shrinks before
his treading: he is able to pierce a corslet with
his eye; talks like a knell, and his hum is a
battery. He sits in his state, as a thing made for
Alexander. What he bids be done is finished with
his bidding. He wants nothing of a god but eternity
and a heaven to throne in.

SICINIUS:
Yes, mercy, if you report him truly.

MENENIUS:
I paint him in the character. Mark what mercy his
mother shall bring from him: there is no more mercy
in him than there is milk in a male tiger; that
shall our poor city find: and all this is long of
you.

SICINIUS:
The gods be good unto us!

MENENIUS:
No, in such a case the gods will not be good unto
us. When we banished him, we respected not them;
and, he returning to break our necks, they respect not us.

Messenger:
Sir, if you'ld save your life, fly to your house:
The plebeians have got your fellow-tribune
And hale him up and down, all swearing, if
The Roman ladies bring not comfort home,
They'll give him death by inches.

SICINIUS:
What's the news?

Second Messenger:
Good news, good news; the ladies have prevail'd,
The Volscians are dislodged, and Marcius gone:
A merrier day did never yet greet Rome,
No, not the expulsion of the Tarquins.

SICINIUS:
Friend,
Art thou certain this is true? is it most certain?

Second Messenger:
As certain as I know the sun is fire:
Where have you lurk'd, that you make doubt of it?
Ne'er through an arch so hurried the blown tide,
As the recomforted through the gates. Why, hark you!
The trumpets, sackbuts, psalteries and fifes,
Tabours and cymbals and the shouting Romans,
Make the sun dance. Hark you!

MENENIUS:
This is good news:
I will go meet the ladies. This Volumnia
Is worth of consuls, senators, patricians,
A city full; of tribunes, such as you,
A sea and land full. You have pray'd well to-day:
This morning for ten thousand of your throats
I'd not have given a doit. Hark, how they joy!

SICINIUS:
First, the gods bless you for your tidings; next,
Accept my thankfulness.

Second Messenger:
Sir, we have all
Great cause to give great thanks.

SICINIUS:
They are near the city?

Second Messenger:
Almost at point to enter.

SICINIUS:
We will meet them,
And help the joy.

First Senator:
Behold our patroness, the life of Rome!
Call all your tribes together, praise the gods,
And make triumphant fires; strew flowers before them:
Unshout the noise that banish'd Marcius,
Repeal him with the welcome of his mother;
Cry 'Welcome, ladies, welcome!'

All:
Welcome, ladies, Welcome!

AUFIDIUS:
Go tell the lords o' the city I am here:
Deliver them this paper: having read it,
Bid them repair to the market place; where I,
Even in theirs and in the commons' ears,
Will vouch the truth of it. Him I accuse
The city ports by this hath enter'd and
Intends to appear before the people, hoping
To purge herself with words: dispatch.
Most welcome!

First Conspirator:
How is it with our general?

AUFIDIUS:
Even so
As with a man by his own alms empoison'd,
And with his charity slain.

Second Conspirator:
Most noble sir,
If you do hold the same intent wherein
You wish'd us parties, we'll deliver you
Of your great danger.

AUFIDIUS:
Sir, I cannot tell:
We must proceed as we do find the people.

Third Conspirator:
The people will remain uncertain whilst
'Twixt you there's difference; but the fall of either
Makes the survivor heir of all.

AUFIDIUS:
I know it;
And my pretext to strike at him admits
A good construction. I raised him, and I pawn'd
Mine honour for his truth: who being so heighten'd,
He water'd his new plants with dews of flattery,
Seducing so my friends; and, to this end,
He bow'd his nature, never known before
But to be rough, unswayable and free.

Third Conspirator:
Sir, his stoutness
When he did stand for consul, which he lost
By lack of stooping,--

AUFIDIUS:
That I would have spoke of:
Being banish'd for't, he came unto my hearth;
Presented to my knife his throat: I took him;
Made him joint-servant with me; gave him way
In all his own desires; nay, let him choose
Out of my files, his projects to accomplish,
My best and freshest men; served his designments
In mine own person; holp to reap the fame
Which he did end all his; and took some pride
To do myself this wrong: till, at the last,
I seem'd his follower, not partner, and
He waged me with his countenance, as if
I had been mercenary.

First Conspirator:
So he did, my lord:
The army marvell'd at it, and, in the last,
When he had carried Rome and that we look'd
For no less spoil than glory,--

AUFIDIUS:
There was it:
For which my sinews shall be stretch'd upon him.
At a few drops of women's rheum, which are
As cheap as lies, he sold the blood and labour
Of our great action: therefore shall he die,
And I'll renew me in his fall. But, hark!

First Conspirator:
Your native town you enter'd like a post,
And had no welcomes home: but he returns,
Splitting the air with noise.

Second Conspirator:
And patient fools,
Whose children he hath slain, their base throats tear
With giving him glory.

Third Conspirator:
Therefore, at your vantage,
Ere he express himself, or move the people
With what he would say, let him feel your sword,
Which we will second. When he lies along,
After your way his tale pronounced shall bury
His reasons with his body.

AUFIDIUS:
Say no more:
Here come the lords.

All The Lords:
You are most welcome home.

AUFIDIUS:
I have not deserved it.
But, worthy lords, have you with heed perused
What I have written to you?

Lords:
We have.

First Lord:
And grieve to hear't.
What faults he made before the last, I think
Might have found easy fines: but there to end
Where he was to begin and give away
The benefit of our levies, answering us
With our own charge, making a treaty where
There was a yielding,--this admits no excuse.

AUFIDIUS:
He approaches: you shall hear him.

CORIOLANUS:
Hail, lords! I am return'd your soldier,
No more infected with my country's love
Than when I parted hence, but still subsisting
Under your great command. You are to know
That prosperously I have attempted and
With bloody passage led your wars even to
The gates of Rome. Our spoils we have brought home
Do more than counterpoise a full third part
The charges of the action. We have made peace
With no less honour to the Antiates
Than shame to the Romans: and we here deliver,
Subscribed by the consuls and patricians,
Together with the seal o' the senate, what
We have compounded on.

AUFIDIUS:
Read it not, noble lords;
But tell the traitor, in the high'st degree
He hath abused your powers.

CORIOLANUS:
Traitor! how now!

AUFIDIUS:
Ay, traitor, Marcius!

CORIOLANUS:
Marcius!

AUFIDIUS:
Ay, Marcius, Caius Marcius: dost thou think
I'll grace thee with that robbery, thy stol'n name
Coriolanus in Corioli?
You lords and heads o' the state, perfidiously
He has betray'd your business, and given up,
For certain drops of salt, your city Rome,
I say 'your city,' to his wife and mother;
Breaking his oath and resolution like
A twist of rotten silk, never admitting
Counsel o' the war, but at his nurse's tears
He whined and roar'd away your victory,
That pages blush'd at him and men of heart
Look'd wondering each at other.

CORIOLANUS:
Hear'st thou, Mars?

AUFIDIUS:
Name not the god, thou boy of tears!

CORIOLANUS:
Ha!

AUFIDIUS:
No more.

CORIOLANUS:
Measureless liar, thou hast made my heart
Too great for what contains it. Boy! O slave!
Pardon me, lords, 'tis the first time that ever
I was forced to scold. Your judgments, my grave lords,
Must give this cur the lie: and his own notion--
Who wears my stripes impress'd upon him; that
Must bear my beating to his grave--shall join
To thrust the lie unto him.

First Lord:
Peace, both, and hear me speak.

CORIOLANUS:
Cut me to pieces, Volsces; men and lads,
Stain all your edges on me. Boy! false hound!
If you have writ your annals true, 'tis there,
That, like an eagle in a dove-cote, I
Flutter'd your Volscians in Corioli:
Alone I did it. Boy!

AUFIDIUS:
Why, noble lords,
Will you be put in mind of his blind fortune,
Which was your shame, by this unholy braggart,
'Fore your own eyes and ears?

All Conspirators:
Let him die for't.

All The People:
'Tear him to pieces.' 'Do it presently.' 'He kill'd
my son.' 'My daughter.' 'He killed my cousin
Marcus.' 'He killed my father.'

Second Lord:
Peace, ho! no outrage: peace!
The man is noble and his fame folds-in
This orb o' the earth. His last offences to us
Shall have judicious hearing. Stand, Aufidius,
And trouble not the peace.

CORIOLANUS:
O that I had him,
With six Aufidiuses, or more, his tribe,
To use my lawful sword!

AUFIDIUS:
Insolent villain!

All Conspirators:
Kill, kill, kill, kill, kill him!

Lords:
Hold, hold, hold, hold!

AUFIDIUS:
My noble masters, hear me speak.

First Lord:
O Tullus,--

Second Lord:
Thou hast done a deed whereat valour will weep.

Third Lord:
Tread not upon him. Masters all, be quiet;
Put up your swords.

AUFIDIUS:
My lords, when you shall know--as in this rage,
Provoked by him, you cannot--the great danger
Which this man's life did owe you, you'll rejoice
That he is thus cut off. Please it your honours
To call me to your senate, I'll deliver
Myself your loyal servant, or endure
Your heaviest censure.

First Lord:
Bear from hence his body;
And mourn you for him: let him be regarded
As the most noble corse that ever herald
Did follow to his urn.

Second Lord:
His own impatience
Takes from Aufidius a great part of blame.
Let's make the best of it.

AUFIDIUS:
My rage is gone;
And I am struck with sorrow. Take him up.
Help, three o' the chiefest soldiers; I'll be one.
Beat thou the drum, that it speak mournfully:
Trail your steel pikes. Though in this city he
Hath widow'd and unchilded many a one,
Which to this hour bewail the injury,
Yet he shall have a noble memory. Assist.

GLOUCESTER:
Now is the winter of our discontent
Made glorious summer by this sun of York;
And all the clouds that lour'd upon our house
In the deep bosom of the ocean buried.
Now are our brows bound with victorious wreaths;
Our bruised arms hung up for monuments;
Our stern alarums changed to merry meetings,
Our dreadful marches to delightful measures.
Grim-visaged war hath smooth'd his wrinkled front;
And now, instead of mounting barded steeds
To fright the souls of fearful adversaries,
He capers nimbly in a lady's chamber
To the lascivious pleasing of a lute.
But I, that am not shaped for sportive tricks,
Nor made to court an amorous looking-glass;
I, that am rudely stamp'd, and want love's majesty
To strut before a wanton ambling nymph;
I, that am curtail'd of this fair proportion,
Cheated of feature by dissembling nature,
Deformed, unfinish'd, sent before my time
Into this breathing world, scarce half made up,
And that so lamely and unfashionable
That dogs bark at me as I halt by them;
Why, I, in this weak piping time of peace,
Have no delight to pass away the time,
Unless to spy my shadow in the sun
And descant on mine own deformity:
And therefore, since I cannot prove a lover,
To entertain these fair well-spoken days,
I am determined to prove a villain
And hate the idle pleasures of these days.
Plots have I laid, inductions dangerous,
By drunken prophecies, libels and dreams,
To set my brother Clarence and the king
In deadly hate the one against the other:
And if King Edward be as true and just
As I am subtle, false and treacherous,
This day should Clarence closely be mew'd up,
About a prophecy, which says that 'G'
Of Edward's heirs the murderer shall be.
Dive, thoughts, down to my soul: here
Clarence comes.
Brother, good day; what means this armed guard
That waits upon your grace?

CLARENCE:


--- End of file: shakespear_03.txt ---

His majesty
Tendering my person's safety, hath appointed
This conduct to convey me to the Tower.

GLOUCESTER:
Upon what cause?

CLARENCE:
Because my name is George.

GLOUCESTER:
Alack, my lord, that fault is none of yours;
He should, for that, commit your godfathers:
O, belike his majesty hath some intent
That you shall be new-christen'd in the Tower.
But what's the matter, Clarence?  may I know?

CLARENCE:
Yea, Richard, when I know; for I protest
As yet I do not: but, as I can learn,
He hearkens after prophecies and dreams;
And from the cross-row plucks the letter G.
And says a wizard told him that by G
His issue disinherited should be;
And, for my name of George begins with G,
It follows in his thought that I am he.
These, as I learn, and such like toys as these
Have moved his highness to commit me now.

GLOUCESTER:
Why, this it is, when men are ruled by women:
'Tis not the king that sends you to the Tower:
My Lady Grey his wife, Clarence, 'tis she
That tempers him to this extremity.
Was it not she and that good man of worship,
Anthony Woodville, her brother there,
That made him send Lord Hastings to the Tower,
From whence this present day he is deliver'd?
We are not safe, Clarence; we are not safe.

CLARENCE:
By heaven, I think there's no man is secure
But the queen's kindred and night-walking heralds
That trudge betwixt the king and Mistress Shore.
Heard ye not what an humble suppliant
Lord hastings was to her for his delivery?

GLOUCESTER:
Humbly complaining to her deity
Got my lord chamberlain his liberty.
I'll tell you what; I think it is our way,
If we will keep in favour with the king,
To be her men and wear her livery:
The jealous o'erworn widow and herself,
Since that our brother dubb'd them gentlewomen.
Are mighty gossips in this monarchy.

BRAKENBURY:
I beseech your graces both to pardon me;
His majesty hath straitly given in charge
That no man shall have private conference,
Of what degree soever, with his brother.

GLOUCESTER:
Even so; an't please your worship, Brakenbury,
You may partake of any thing we say:
We speak no treason, man: we say the king
Is wise and virtuous, and his noble queen
Well struck in years, fair, and not jealous;
We say that Shore's wife hath a pretty foot,
A cherry lip, a bonny eye, a passing pleasing tongue;
And that the queen's kindred are made gentle-folks:
How say you sir? Can you deny all this?

BRAKENBURY:
With this, my lord, myself have nought to do.

GLOUCESTER:
Naught to do with mistress Shore! I tell thee, fellow,
He that doth naught with her, excepting one,
Were best he do it secretly, alone.

BRAKENBURY:
What one, my lord?

GLOUCESTER:
Her husband, knave: wouldst thou betray me?

BRAKENBURY:
I beseech your grace to pardon me, and withal
Forbear your conference with the noble duke.

CLARENCE:
We know thy charge, Brakenbury, and will obey.

GLOUCESTER:
We are the queen's abjects, and must obey.
Brother, farewell: I will unto the king;
And whatsoever you will employ me in,
Were it to call King Edward's widow sister,
I will perform it to enfranchise you.
Meantime, this deep disgrace in brotherhood
Touches me deeper than you can imagine.

CLARENCE:
I know it pleaseth neither of us well.

GLOUCESTER:
Well, your imprisonment shall not be long;
Meantime, have patience.

CLARENCE:
I must perforce. Farewell.

GLOUCESTER:
Go, tread the path that thou shalt ne'er return.
Simple, plain Clarence! I do love thee so,
That I will shortly send thy soul to heaven,
If heaven will take the present at our hands.
But who comes here? the new-deliver'd Hastings?

HASTINGS:
Good time of day unto my gracious lord!

GLOUCESTER:
As much unto my good lord chamberlain!
Well are you welcome to the open air.
How hath your lordship brook'd imprisonment?

HASTINGS:
With patience, noble lord, as prisoners must:
But I shall live, my lord, to give them thanks
That were the cause of my imprisonment.

GLOUCESTER:
No doubt, no doubt; and so shall Clarence too;
For they that were your enemies are his,
And have prevail'd as much on him as you.

HASTINGS:
More pity that the eagle should be mew'd,
While kites and buzzards prey at liberty.

GLOUCESTER:
What news abroad?

HASTINGS:
No news so bad abroad as this at home;
The King is sickly, weak and melancholy,
And his physicians fear him mightily.

GLOUCESTER:
Now, by Saint Paul, this news is bad indeed.
O, he hath kept an evil diet long,
And overmuch consumed his royal person:
'Tis very grievous to be thought upon.
What, is he in his bed?

HASTINGS:
He is.

GLOUCESTER:
Go you before, and I will follow you.
He cannot live, I hope; and must not die
Till George be pack'd with post-horse up to heaven.
I'll in, to urge his hatred more to Clarence,
With lies well steel'd with weighty arguments;
And, if I fall not in my deep intent,
Clarence hath not another day to live:
Which done, God take King Edward to his mercy,
And leave the world for me to bustle in!
For then I'll marry Warwick's youngest daughter.
What though I kill'd her husband and her father?
The readiest way to make the wench amends
Is to become her husband and her father:
The which will I; not all so much for love
As for another secret close intent,
By marrying her which I must reach unto.
But yet I run before my horse to market:
Clarence still breathes; Edward still lives and reigns:
When they are gone, then must I count my gains.

LADY ANNE:
Set down, set down your honourable load,
If honour may be shrouded in a hearse,
Whilst I awhile obsequiously lament
The untimely fall of virtuous Lancaster.
Poor key-cold figure of a holy king!
Pale ashes of the house of Lancaster!
Thou bloodless remnant of that royal blood!
Be it lawful that I invocate thy ghost,
To hear the lamentations of Poor Anne,
Wife to thy Edward, to thy slaughter'd son,
Stabb'd by the selfsame hand that made these wounds!
Lo, in these windows that let forth thy life,
I pour the helpless balm of my poor eyes.
Cursed be the hand that made these fatal holes!
Cursed be the heart that had the heart to do it!
Cursed the blood that let this blood from hence!
More direful hap betide that hated wretch,
That makes us wretched by the death of thee,
Than I can wish to adders, spiders, toads,
Or any creeping venom'd thing that lives!
If ever he have child, abortive be it,
Prodigious, and untimely brought to light,
Whose ugly and unnatural aspect
May fright the hopeful mother at the view;
And that be heir to his unhappiness!
If ever he have wife, let her he made
A miserable by the death of him
As I am made by my poor lord and thee!
Come, now towards Chertsey with your holy load,
Taken from Paul's to be interred there;
And still, as you are weary of the weight,
Rest you, whiles I lament King Henry's corse.

GLOUCESTER:
Stay, you that bear the corse, and set it down.

LADY ANNE:
What black magician conjures up this fiend,
To stop devoted charitable deeds?

GLOUCESTER:
Villains, set down the corse; or, by Saint Paul,
I'll make a corse of him that disobeys.

Gentleman:
My lord, stand back, and let the coffin pass.

GLOUCESTER:
Unmanner'd dog! stand thou, when I command:
Advance thy halbert higher than my breast,
Or, by Saint Paul, I'll strike thee to my foot,
And spurn upon thee, beggar, for thy boldness.

LADY ANNE:
What, do you tremble? are you all afraid?
Alas, I blame you not; for you are mortal,
And mortal eyes cannot endure the devil.
Avaunt, thou dreadful minister of hell!
Thou hadst but power over his mortal body,
His soul thou canst not have; therefore be gone.

GLOUCESTER:
Sweet saint, for charity, be not so curst.

LADY ANNE:
Foul devil, for God's sake, hence, and trouble us not;
For thou hast made the happy earth thy hell,
Fill'd it with cursing cries and deep exclaims.
If thou delight to view thy heinous deeds,
Behold this pattern of thy butcheries.
O, gentlemen, see, see! dead Henry's wounds
Open their congeal'd mouths and bleed afresh!
Blush, Blush, thou lump of foul deformity;
For 'tis thy presence that exhales this blood
From cold and empty veins, where no blood dwells;
Thy deed, inhuman and unnatural,
Provokes this deluge most unnatural.
O God, which this blood madest, revenge his death!
O earth, which this blood drink'st revenge his death!
Either heaven with lightning strike the
murderer dead,
Or earth, gape open wide and eat him quick,
As thou dost swallow up this good king's blood
Which his hell-govern'd arm hath butchered!

GLOUCESTER:
Lady, you know no rules of charity,
Which renders good for bad, blessings for curses.

LADY ANNE:
Villain, thou know'st no law of God nor man:
No beast so fierce but knows some touch of pity.

GLOUCESTER:
But I know none, and therefore am no beast.

LADY ANNE:
O wonderful, when devils tell the truth!

GLOUCESTER:
More wonderful, when angels are so angry.
Vouchsafe, divine perfection of a woman,
Of these supposed-evils, to give me leave,
By circumstance, but to acquit myself.

LADY ANNE:
Vouchsafe, defused infection of a man,
For these known evils, but to give me leave,
By circumstance, to curse thy cursed self.

GLOUCESTER:
Fairer than tongue can name thee, let me have
Some patient leisure to excuse myself.

LADY ANNE:
Fouler than heart can think thee, thou canst make
No excuse current, but to hang thyself.

GLOUCESTER:
By such despair, I should accuse myself.

LADY ANNE:
And, by despairing, shouldst thou stand excused;
For doing worthy vengeance on thyself,
Which didst unworthy slaughter upon others.

GLOUCESTER:
Say that I slew them not?

LADY ANNE:
Why, then they are not dead:
But dead they are, and devilish slave, by thee.

GLOUCESTER:
I did not kill your husband.

LADY ANNE:
Why, then he is alive.

GLOUCESTER:
Nay, he is dead; and slain by Edward's hand.

LADY ANNE:
In thy foul throat thou liest: Queen Margaret saw
Thy murderous falchion smoking in his blood;
The which thou once didst bend against her breast,
But that thy brothers beat aside the point.

GLOUCESTER:
I was provoked by her slanderous tongue,
which laid their guilt upon my guiltless shoulders.

LADY ANNE:
Thou wast provoked by thy bloody mind.
Which never dreamt on aught but butcheries:
Didst thou not kill this king?

GLOUCESTER:
I grant ye.

LADY ANNE:
Dost grant me, hedgehog? then, God grant me too
Thou mayst be damned for that wicked deed!
O, he was gentle, mild, and virtuous!

GLOUCESTER:
The fitter for the King of heaven, that hath him.

LADY ANNE:
He is in heaven, where thou shalt never come.

GLOUCESTER:
Let him thank me, that holp to send him thither;
For he was fitter for that place than earth.

LADY ANNE:
And thou unfit for any place but hell.

GLOUCESTER:
Yes, one place else, if you will hear me name it.

LADY ANNE:
Some dungeon.

GLOUCESTER:
Your bed-chamber.

LADY ANNE:
I'll rest betide the chamber where thou liest!

GLOUCESTER:
So will it, madam till I lie with you.

LADY ANNE:
I hope so.

GLOUCESTER:
I know so. But, gentle Lady Anne,
To leave this keen encounter of our wits,
And fall somewhat into a slower method,
Is not the causer of the timeless deaths
Of these Plantagenets, Henry and Edward,
As blameful as the executioner?

LADY ANNE:
Thou art the cause, and most accursed effect.

GLOUCESTER:
Your beauty was the cause of that effect;
Your beauty: which did haunt me in my sleep
To undertake the death of all the world,
So I might live one hour in your sweet bosom.

LADY ANNE:
If I thought that, I tell thee, homicide,
These nails should rend that beauty from my cheeks.

GLOUCESTER:
These eyes could never endure sweet beauty's wreck;
You should not blemish it, if I stood by:
As all the world is cheered by the sun,
So I by that; it is my day, my life.

LADY ANNE:
Black night o'ershade thy day, and death thy life!

GLOUCESTER:
Curse not thyself, fair creature thou art both.

LADY ANNE:
I would I were, to be revenged on thee.

GLOUCESTER:
It is a quarrel most unnatural,
To be revenged on him that loveth you.

LADY ANNE:
It is a quarrel just and reasonable,
To be revenged on him that slew my husband.

GLOUCESTER:
He that bereft thee, lady, of thy husband,
Did it to help thee to a better husband.

LADY ANNE:
His better doth not breathe upon the earth.

GLOUCESTER:
He lives that loves thee better than he could.

LADY ANNE:
Name him.

GLOUCESTER:
Plantagenet.

LADY ANNE:
Why, that was he.

GLOUCESTER:
The selfsame name, but one of better nature.

LADY ANNE:
Where is he?

GLOUCESTER:
Here.
Why dost thou spit at me?

LADY ANNE:
Would it were mortal poison, for thy sake!

GLOUCESTER:
Never came poison from so sweet a place.

LADY ANNE:
Never hung poison on a fouler toad.
Out of my sight! thou dost infect my eyes.

GLOUCESTER:
Thine eyes, sweet lady, have infected mine.

LADY ANNE:
Would they were basilisks, to strike thee dead!

GLOUCESTER:
I would they were, that I might die at once;
For now they kill me with a living death.
Those eyes of thine from mine have drawn salt tears,
Shamed their aspect with store of childish drops:
These eyes that never shed remorseful tear,
No, when my father York and Edward wept,
To hear the piteous moan that Rutland made
When black-faced Clifford shook his sword at him;
Nor when thy warlike father, like a child,
Told the sad story of my father's death,
And twenty times made pause to sob and weep,
That all the standers-by had wet their cheeks
Like trees bedash'd with rain: in that sad time
My manly eyes did scorn an humble tear;
And what these sorrows could not thence exhale,
Thy beauty hath, and made them blind with weeping.
I never sued to friend nor enemy;
My tongue could never learn sweet smoothing word;
But now thy beauty is proposed my fee,
My proud heart sues, and prompts my tongue to speak.
Teach not thy lips such scorn, for they were made
For kissing, lady, not for such contempt.
If thy revengeful heart cannot forgive,
Lo, here I lend thee this sharp-pointed sword;
Which if thou please to hide in this true bosom.
And let the soul forth that adoreth thee,
I lay it naked to the deadly stroke,
And humbly beg the death upon my knee.
Nay, do not pause; for I did kill King Henry,
But 'twas thy beauty that provoked me.
Nay, now dispatch; 'twas I that stabb'd young Edward,
But 'twas thy heavenly face that set me on.
Take up the sword again, or take up me.

LADY ANNE:
Arise, dissembler: though I wish thy death,
I will not be the executioner.

GLOUCESTER:
Then bid me kill myself, and I will do it.

LADY ANNE:
I have already.

GLOUCESTER:
Tush, that was in thy rage:
Speak it again, and, even with the word,
That hand, which, for thy love, did kill thy love,
Shall, for thy love, kill a far truer love;
To both their deaths thou shalt be accessary.

LADY ANNE:
I would I knew thy heart.

GLOUCESTER:
'Tis figured in my tongue.

LADY ANNE:
I fear me both are false.

GLOUCESTER:
Then never man was true.

LADY ANNE:
Well, well, put up your sword.

GLOUCESTER:
Say, then, my peace is made.

LADY ANNE:
That shall you know hereafter.

GLOUCESTER:
But shall I live in hope?

LADY ANNE:
All men, I hope, live so.

GLOUCESTER:
Vouchsafe to wear this ring.

LADY ANNE:
To take is not to give.

GLOUCESTER:
Look, how this ring encompasseth finger.
Even so thy breast encloseth my poor heart;
Wear both of them, for both of them are thine.
And if thy poor devoted suppliant may
But beg one favour at thy gracious hand,
Thou dost confirm his happiness for ever.

LADY ANNE:
What is it?

GLOUCESTER:
That it would please thee leave these sad designs
To him that hath more cause to be a mourner,
And presently repair to Crosby Place;
Where, after I have solemnly interr'd
At Chertsey monastery this noble king,
And wet his grave with my repentant tears,
I will with all expedient duty see you:
For divers unknown reasons. I beseech you,
Grant me this boon.

LADY ANNE:
With all my heart; and much it joys me too,
To see you are become so penitent.
Tressel and Berkeley, go along with me.

GLOUCESTER:
Bid me farewell.

LADY ANNE:
'Tis more than you deserve;
But since you teach me how to flatter you,
Imagine I have said farewell already.

GLOUCESTER:
Sirs, take up the corse.

GENTLEMEN:
Towards Chertsey, noble lord?

GLOUCESTER:
No, to White-Friars; there attend my coining.
Was ever woman in this humour woo'd?
Was ever woman in this humour won?
I'll have her; but I will not keep her long.
What! I, that kill'd her husband and his father,
To take her in her heart's extremest hate,
With curses in her mouth, tears in her eyes,
The bleeding witness of her hatred by;
Having God, her conscience, and these bars
against me,
And I nothing to back my suit at all,
But the plain devil and dissembling looks,
And yet to win her, all the world to nothing!
Ha!
Hath she forgot already that brave prince,
Edward, her lord, whom I, some three months since,
Stabb'd in my angry mood at Tewksbury?
A sweeter and a lovelier gentleman,
Framed in the prodigality of nature,
Young, valiant, wise, and, no doubt, right royal,
The spacious world cannot again afford
And will she yet debase her eyes on me,
That cropp'd the golden prime of this sweet prince,
And made her widow to a woful bed?
On me, whose all not equals Edward's moiety?
On me, that halt and am unshapen thus?
My dukedom to a beggarly denier,
I do mistake my person all this while:
Upon my life, she finds, although I cannot,
Myself to be a marvellous proper man.
I'll be at charges for a looking-glass,
And entertain some score or two of tailors,
To study fashions to adorn my body:
Since I am crept in favour with myself,
Will maintain it with some little cost.
But first I'll turn yon fellow in his grave;
And then return lamenting to my love.
Shine out, fair sun, till I have bought a glass,
That I may see my shadow as I pass.

RIVERS:
Have patience, madam: there's no doubt his majesty
Will soon recover his accustom'd health.

GREY:
In that you brook it in, it makes him worse:
Therefore, for God's sake, entertain good comfort,
And cheer his grace with quick and merry words.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
If he were dead, what would betide of me?

RIVERS:
No other harm but loss of such a lord.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
The loss of such a lord includes all harm.

GREY:
The heavens have bless'd you with a goodly son,
To be your comforter when he is gone.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Oh, he is young and his minority
Is put unto the trust of Richard Gloucester,
A man that loves not me, nor none of you.

RIVERS:
Is it concluded that he shall be protector?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
It is determined, not concluded yet:
But so it must be, if the king miscarry.

GREY:
Here come the lords of Buckingham and Derby.

BUCKINGHAM:
Good time of day unto your royal grace!

DERBY:
God make your majesty joyful as you have been!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
The Countess Richmond, good my Lord of Derby.
To your good prayers will scarcely say amen.
Yet, Derby, notwithstanding she's your wife,
And loves not me, be you, good lord, assured
I hate not you for her proud arrogance.

DERBY:
I do beseech you, either not believe
The envious slanders of her false accusers;
Or, if she be accused in true report,
Bear with her weakness, which, I think proceeds
From wayward sickness, and no grounded malice.

RIVERS:
Saw you the king to-day, my Lord of Derby?

DERBY:
But now the Duke of Buckingham and I
Are come from visiting his majesty.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
What likelihood of his amendment, lords?

BUCKINGHAM:
Madam, good hope; his grace speaks cheerfully.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
God grant him health! Did you confer with him?

BUCKINGHAM:
Madam, we did: he desires to make atonement
Betwixt the Duke of Gloucester and your brothers,
And betwixt them and my lord chamberlain;
And sent to warn them to his royal presence.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Would all were well! but that will never be
I fear our happiness is at the highest.

GLOUCESTER:
They do me wrong, and I will not endure it:
Who are they that complain unto the king,
That I, forsooth, am stern, and love them not?
By holy Paul, they love his grace but lightly
That fill his ears with such dissentious rumours.
Because I cannot flatter and speak fair,
Smile in men's faces, smooth, deceive and cog,
Duck with French nods and apish courtesy,
I must be held a rancorous enemy.
Cannot a plain man live and think no harm,
But thus his simple truth must be abused
By silken, sly, insinuating Jacks?

RIVERS:
To whom in all this presence speaks your grace?

GLOUCESTER:
To thee, that hast nor honesty nor grace.
When have I injured thee? when done thee wrong?
Or thee? or thee? or any of your faction?
A plague upon you all! His royal person,--
Whom God preserve better than you would wish!--
Cannot be quiet scarce a breathing-while,
But you must trouble him with lewd complaints.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Brother of Gloucester, you mistake the matter.
The king, of his own royal disposition,
And not provoked by any suitor else;
Aiming, belike, at your interior hatred,
Which in your outward actions shows itself
Against my kindred, brothers, and myself,
Makes him to send; that thereby he may gather
The ground of your ill-will, and so remove it.

GLOUCESTER:
I cannot tell: the world is grown so bad,
That wrens make prey where eagles dare not perch:
Since every Jack became a gentleman
There's many a gentle person made a Jack.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Come, come, we know your meaning, brother
Gloucester;
You envy my advancement and my friends':
God grant we never may have need of you!

GLOUCESTER:
Meantime, God grants that we have need of you:
Your brother is imprison'd by your means,
Myself disgraced, and the nobility
Held in contempt; whilst many fair promotions
Are daily given to ennoble those
That scarce, some two days since, were worth a noble.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
By Him that raised me to this careful height
From that contented hap which I enjoy'd,
I never did incense his majesty
Against the Duke of Clarence, but have been
An earnest advocate to plead for him.
My lord, you do me shameful injury,
Falsely to draw me in these vile suspects.

GLOUCESTER:
You may deny that you were not the cause
Of my Lord Hastings' late imprisonment.

RIVERS:
She may, my lord, for--

GLOUCESTER:
She may, Lord Rivers! why, who knows not so?
She may do more, sir, than denying that:
She may help you to many fair preferments,
And then deny her aiding hand therein,
And lay those honours on your high deserts.
What may she not? She may, yea, marry, may she--

RIVERS:
What, marry, may she?

GLOUCESTER:
What, marry, may she! marry with a king,
A bachelor, a handsome stripling too:
I wis your grandam had a worser match.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
My Lord of Gloucester, I have too long borne
Your blunt upbraidings and your bitter scoffs:
By heaven, I will acquaint his majesty
With those gross taunts I often have endured.
I had rather be a country servant-maid
Than a great queen, with this condition,
To be thus taunted, scorn'd, and baited at:
Small joy have I in being England's queen.

QUEEN MARGARET:
And lessen'd be that small, God, I beseech thee!
Thy honour, state and seat is due to me.

GLOUCESTER:
What! threat you me with telling of the king?
Tell him, and spare not: look, what I have said
I will avouch in presence of the king:
I dare adventure to be sent to the Tower.
'Tis time to speak; my pains are quite forgot.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Out, devil! I remember them too well:
Thou slewest my husband Henry in the Tower,
And Edward, my poor son, at Tewksbury.

GLOUCESTER:
Ere you were queen, yea, or your husband king,
I was a pack-horse in his great affairs;
A weeder-out of his proud adversaries,
A liberal rewarder of his friends:
To royalize his blood I spilt mine own.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Yea, and much better blood than his or thine.

GLOUCESTER:
In all which time you and your husband Grey
Were factious for the house of Lancaster;
And, Rivers, so were you. Was not your husband
In Margaret's battle at Saint Alban's slain?
Let me put in your minds, if you forget,
What you have been ere now, and what you are;
Withal, what I have been, and what I am.

QUEEN MARGARET:
A murderous villain, and so still thou art.

GLOUCESTER:
Poor Clarence did forsake his father, Warwick;
Yea, and forswore himself,--which Jesu pardon!--

QUEEN MARGARET:
Which God revenge!

GLOUCESTER:
To fight on Edward's party for the crown;
And for his meed, poor lord, he is mew'd up.
I would to God my heart were flint, like Edward's;
Or Edward's soft and pitiful, like mine
I am too childish-foolish for this world.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Hie thee to hell for shame, and leave the world,
Thou cacodemon! there thy kingdom is.

RIVERS:
My Lord of Gloucester, in those busy days
Which here you urge to prove us enemies,
We follow'd then our lord, our lawful king:
So should we you, if you should be our king.

GLOUCESTER:
If I should be! I had rather be a pedlar:
Far be it from my heart, the thought of it!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
As little joy, my lord, as you suppose
You should enjoy, were you this country's king,
As little joy may you suppose in me.
That I enjoy, being the queen thereof.

QUEEN MARGARET:
A little joy enjoys the queen thereof;
For I am she, and altogether joyless.
I can no longer hold me patient.
Hear me, you wrangling pirates, that fall out
In sharing that which you have pill'd from me!
Which of you trembles not that looks on me?
If not, that, I being queen, you bow like subjects,
Yet that, by you deposed, you quake like rebels?
O gentle villain, do not turn away!

GLOUCESTER:
Foul wrinkled witch, what makest thou in my sight?

QUEEN MARGARET:
But repetition of what thou hast marr'd;
That will I make before I let thee go.

GLOUCESTER:
Wert thou not banished on pain of death?

QUEEN MARGARET:
I was; but I do find more pain in banishment
Than death can yield me here by my abode.
A husband and a son thou owest to me;
And thou a kingdom; all of you allegiance:
The sorrow that I have, by right is yours,
And all the pleasures you usurp are mine.

GLOUCESTER:
The curse my noble father laid on thee,
When thou didst crown his warlike brows with paper
And with thy scorns drew'st rivers from his eyes,
And then, to dry them, gavest the duke a clout
Steep'd in the faultless blood of pretty Rutland--
His curses, then from bitterness of soul
Denounced against thee, are all fall'n upon thee;
And God, not we, hath plagued thy bloody deed.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
So just is God, to right the innocent.

HASTINGS:
O, 'twas the foulest deed to slay that babe,
And the most merciless that e'er was heard of!

RIVERS:
Tyrants themselves wept when it was reported.

DORSET:
No man but prophesied revenge for it.

BUCKINGHAM:
Northumberland, then present, wept to see it.

QUEEN MARGARET:
What were you snarling all before I came,
Ready to catch each other by the throat,
And turn you all your hatred now on me?
Did York's dread curse prevail so much with heaven?
That Henry's death, my lovely Edward's death,
Their kingdom's loss, my woful banishment,
Could all but answer for that peevish brat?
Can curses pierce the clouds and enter heaven?
Why, then, give way, dull clouds, to my quick curses!
If not by war, by surfeit die your king,
As ours by murder, to make him a king!
Edward thy son, which now is Prince of Wales,
For Edward my son, which was Prince of Wales,
Die in his youth by like untimely violence!
Thyself a queen, for me that was a queen,
Outlive thy glory, like my wretched self!
Long mayst thou live to wail thy children's loss;
And see another, as I see thee now,
Deck'd in thy rights, as thou art stall'd in mine!
Long die thy happy days before thy death;
And, after many lengthen'd hours of grief,
Die neither mother, wife, nor England's queen!
Rivers and Dorset, you were standers by,
And so wast thou, Lord Hastings, when my son
Was stabb'd with bloody daggers: God, I pray him,
That none of you may live your natural age,
But by some unlook'd accident cut off!

GLOUCESTER:
Have done thy charm, thou hateful wither'd hag!

QUEEN MARGARET:
And leave out thee? stay, dog, for thou shalt hear me.
If heaven have any grievous plague in store
Exceeding those that I can wish upon thee,
O, let them keep it till thy sins be ripe,
And then hurl down their indignation
On thee, the troubler of the poor world's peace!
The worm of conscience still begnaw thy soul!
Thy friends suspect for traitors while thou livest,
And take deep traitors for thy dearest friends!
No sleep close up that deadly eye of thine,
Unless it be whilst some tormenting dream
Affrights thee with a hell of ugly devils!
Thou elvish-mark'd, abortive, rooting hog!
Thou that wast seal'd in thy nativity
The slave of nature and the son of hell!
Thou slander of thy mother's heavy womb!
Thou loathed issue of thy father's loins!
Thou rag of honour! thou detested--

GLOUCESTER:
Margaret.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Richard!

GLOUCESTER:
Ha!

QUEEN MARGARET:
I call thee not.

GLOUCESTER:
I cry thee mercy then, for I had thought
That thou hadst call'd me all these bitter names.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Why, so I did; but look'd for no reply.
O, let me make the period to my curse!

GLOUCESTER:
'Tis done by me, and ends in 'Margaret.'

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Thus have you breathed your curse against yourself.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Poor painted queen, vain flourish of my fortune!
Why strew'st thou sugar on that bottled spider,
Whose deadly web ensnareth thee about?
Fool, fool! thou whet'st a knife to kill thyself.
The time will come when thou shalt wish for me
To help thee curse that poisonous bunchback'd toad.

HASTINGS:
False-boding woman, end thy frantic curse,
Lest to thy harm thou move our patience.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Foul shame upon you! you have all moved mine.

RIVERS:
Were you well served, you would be taught your duty.

QUEEN MARGARET:
To serve me well, you all should do me duty,
Teach me to be your queen, and you my subjects:
O, serve me well, and teach yourselves that duty!

DORSET:
Dispute not with her; she is lunatic.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Peace, master marquess, you are malapert:
Your fire-new stamp of honour is scarce current.
O, that your young nobility could judge
What 'twere to lose it, and be miserable!
They that stand high have many blasts to shake them;
And if they fall, they dash themselves to pieces.

GLOUCESTER:
Good counsel, marry: learn it, learn it, marquess.

DORSET:
It toucheth you, my lord, as much as me.

GLOUCESTER:
Yea, and much more: but I was born so high,
Our aery buildeth in the cedar's top,
And dallies with the wind and scorns the sun.

QUEEN MARGARET:
And turns the sun to shade; alas! alas!
Witness my son, now in the shade of death;
Whose bright out-shining beams thy cloudy wrath
Hath in eternal darkness folded up.
Your aery buildeth in our aery's nest.
O God, that seest it, do not suffer it!
As it was won with blood, lost be it so!

BUCKINGHAM:
Have done! for shame, if not for charity.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Urge neither charity nor shame to me:
Uncharitably with me have you dealt,
And shamefully by you my hopes are butcher'd.
My charity is outrage, life my shame
And in that shame still live my sorrow's rage.

BUCKINGHAM:
Have done, have done.

QUEEN MARGARET:
O princely Buckingham I'll kiss thy hand,
In sign of league and amity with thee:
Now fair befal thee and thy noble house!
Thy garments are not spotted with our blood,
Nor thou within the compass of my curse.

BUCKINGHAM:
Nor no one here; for curses never pass
The lips of those that breathe them in the air.

QUEEN MARGARET:
I'll not believe but they ascend the sky,
And there awake God's gentle-sleeping peace.
O Buckingham, take heed of yonder dog!
Look, when he fawns, he bites; and when he bites,
His venom tooth will rankle to the death:
Have not to do with him, beware of him;
Sin, death, and hell have set their marks on him,
And all their ministers attend on him.

GLOUCESTER:
What doth she say, my Lord of Buckingham?

BUCKINGHAM:
Nothing that I respect, my gracious lord.

QUEEN MARGARET:
What, dost thou scorn me for my gentle counsel?
And soothe the devil that I warn thee from?
O, but remember this another day,
When he shall split thy very heart with sorrow,
And say poor Margaret was a prophetess!
Live each of you the subjects to his hate,
And he to yours, and all of you to God's!

HASTINGS:
My hair doth stand on end to hear her curses.

RIVERS:
And so doth mine: I muse why she's at liberty.

GLOUCESTER:
I cannot blame her: by God's holy mother,
She hath had too much wrong; and I repent
My part thereof that I have done to her.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
I never did her any, to my knowledge.

GLOUCESTER:
But you have all the vantage of her wrong.
I was too hot to do somebody good,
That is too cold in thinking of it now.
Marry, as for Clarence, he is well repaid,
He is frank'd up to fatting for his pains
God pardon them that are the cause of it!

RIVERS:
A virtuous and a Christian-like conclusion,
To pray for them that have done scathe to us.

GLOUCESTER:
So do I ever:
being well-advised.
For had I cursed now, I had cursed myself.

CATESBY:
Madam, his majesty doth call for you,
And for your grace; and you, my noble lords.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Catesby, we come. Lords, will you go with us?

RIVERS:
Madam, we will attend your grace.

GLOUCESTER:
I do the wrong, and first begin to brawl.
The secret mischiefs that I set abroach
I lay unto the grievous charge of others.
Clarence, whom I, indeed, have laid in darkness,
I do beweep to many simple gulls
Namely, to Hastings, Derby, Buckingham;
And say it is the queen and her allies
That stir the king against the duke my brother.
Now, they believe it; and withal whet me
To be revenged on Rivers, Vaughan, Grey:
But then I sigh; and, with a piece of scripture,
Tell them that God bids us do good for evil:
And thus I clothe my naked villany
With old odd ends stolen out of holy writ;
And seem a saint, when most I play the devil.
But, soft! here come my executioners.
How now, my hardy, stout resolved mates!
Are you now going to dispatch this deed?

First Murderer:
We are, my lord; and come to have the warrant
That we may be admitted where he is.

GLOUCESTER:
Well thought upon; I have it here about me.
When you have done, repair to Crosby Place.
But, sirs, be sudden in the execution,
Withal obdurate, do not hear him plead;
For Clarence is well-spoken, and perhaps
May move your hearts to pity if you mark him.

First Murderer:
Tush!
Fear not, my lord, we will not stand to prate;
Talkers are no good doers: be assured
We come to use our hands and not our tongues.

GLOUCESTER:
Your eyes drop millstones, when fools' eyes drop tears:
I like you, lads; about your business straight;
Go, go, dispatch.

First Murderer:
We will, my noble lord.

BRAKENBURY:
Why looks your grace so heavily today?

CLARENCE:
O, I have pass'd a miserable night,
So full of ugly sights, of ghastly dreams,
That, as I am a Christian faithful man,
I would not spend another such a night,
Though 'twere to buy a world of happy days,
So full of dismal terror was the time!

BRAKENBURY:
What was your dream? I long to hear you tell it.

CLARENCE:
Methoughts that I had broken from the Tower,
And was embark'd to cross to Burgundy;
And, in my company, my brother Gloucester;
Who from my cabin tempted me to walk
Upon the hatches: thence we looked toward England,
And cited up a thousand fearful times,
During the wars of York and Lancaster
That had befall'n us. As we paced along
Upon the giddy footing of the hatches,
Methought that Gloucester stumbled; and, in falling,
Struck me, that thought to stay him, overboard,
Into the tumbling billows of the main.
Lord, Lord! methought, what pain it was to drown!
What dreadful noise of waters in mine ears!
What ugly sights of death within mine eyes!
Methought I saw a thousand fearful wrecks;
Ten thousand men that fishes gnaw'd upon;
Wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of pearl,
Inestimable stones, unvalued jewels,
All scatter'd in the bottom of the sea:
Some lay in dead men's skulls; and, in those holes
Where eyes did once inhabit, there were crept,
As 'twere in scorn of eyes, reflecting gems,
Which woo'd the slimy bottom of the deep,
And mock'd the dead bones that lay scatter'd by.

BRAKENBURY:
Had you such leisure in the time of death
To gaze upon the secrets of the deep?

CLARENCE:
Methought I had; and often did I strive
To yield the ghost: but still the envious flood
Kept in my soul, and would not let it forth
To seek the empty, vast and wandering air;
But smother'd it within my panting bulk,
Which almost burst to belch it in the sea.

BRAKENBURY:
Awaked you not with this sore agony?

CLARENCE:
O, no, my dream was lengthen'd after life;
O, then began the tempest to my soul,
Who pass'd, methought, the melancholy flood,
With that grim ferryman which poets write of,
Unto the kingdom of perpetual night.
The first that there did greet my stranger soul,
Was my great father-in-law, renowned Warwick;
Who cried aloud, 'What scourge for perjury
Can this dark monarchy afford false Clarence?'
And so he vanish'd: then came wandering by
A shadow like an angel, with bright hair
Dabbled in blood; and he squeak'd out aloud,
'Clarence is come; false, fleeting, perjured Clarence,
That stabb'd me in the field by Tewksbury;
Seize on him, Furies, take him to your torments!'
With that, methoughts, a legion of foul fiends
Environ'd me about, and howled in mine ears
Such hideous cries, that with the very noise
I trembling waked, and for a season after
Could not believe but that I was in hell,
Such terrible impression made the dream.

BRAKENBURY:
No marvel, my lord, though it affrighted you;
I promise, I am afraid to hear you tell it.

CLARENCE:
O Brakenbury, I have done those things,
Which now bear evidence against my soul,
For Edward's sake; and see how he requites me!
O God! if my deep prayers cannot appease thee,
But thou wilt be avenged on my misdeeds,
Yet execute thy wrath in me alone,
O, spare my guiltless wife and my poor children!
I pray thee, gentle keeper, stay by me;
My soul is heavy, and I fain would sleep.

BRAKENBURY:
I will, my lord: God give your grace good rest!
Sorrow breaks seasons and reposing hours,
Makes the night morning, and the noon-tide night.
Princes have but their tides for their glories,
An outward honour for an inward toil;
And, for unfelt imagination,
They often feel a world of restless cares:
So that, betwixt their tides and low names,
There's nothing differs but the outward fame.

First Murderer:
Ho! who's here?

BRAKENBURY:
In God's name what are you, and how came you hither?

First Murderer:
I would speak with Clarence, and I came hither on my legs.

BRAKENBURY:
Yea, are you so brief?

Second Murderer:
O sir, it is better to be brief than tedious. Show
him our commission; talk no more.

BRAKENBURY:
I am, in this, commanded to deliver
The noble Duke of Clarence to your hands:
I will not reason what is meant hereby,
Because I will be guiltless of the meaning.
Here are the keys, there sits the duke asleep:
I'll to the king; and signify to him
That thus I have resign'd my charge to you.

First Murderer:
Do so, it is a point of wisdom: fare you well.

Second Murderer:
What, shall we stab him as he sleeps?

First Murderer:
No; then he will say 'twas done cowardly, when he wakes.

Second Murderer:
When he wakes! why, fool, he shall never wake till
the judgment-day.

First Murderer:
Why, then he will say we stabbed him sleeping.

Second Murderer:
The urging of that word 'judgment' hath bred a kind
of remorse in me.

First Murderer:
What, art thou afraid?

Second Murderer:
Not to kill him, having a warrant for it; but to be
damned for killing him, from which no warrant can defend us.

First Murderer:
I thought thou hadst been resolute.

Second Murderer:
So I am, to let him live.

First Murderer:
Back to the Duke of Gloucester, tell him so.

Second Murderer:
I pray thee, stay a while: I hope my holy humour
will change; 'twas wont to hold me but while one
would tell twenty.

First Murderer:
How dost thou feel thyself now?

Second Murderer:
'Faith, some certain dregs of conscience are yet
within me.

First Murderer:
Remember our reward, when the deed is done.

Second Murderer:
'Zounds, he dies: I had forgot the reward.

First Murderer:
Where is thy conscience now?

Second Murderer:
In the Duke of Gloucester's purse.

First Murderer:
So when he opens his purse to give us our reward,
thy conscience flies out.

Second Murderer:
Let it go; there's few or none will entertain it.

First Murderer:
How if it come to thee again?

Second Murderer:
I'll not meddle with it: it is a dangerous thing: it
makes a man a coward: a man cannot steal, but it
accuseth him; he cannot swear, but it cheques him;
he cannot lie with his neighbour's wife, but it
detects him: 'tis a blushing shamefast spirit that
mutinies in a man's bosom; it fills one full of
obstacles: it made me once restore a purse of gold
that I found; it beggars any man that keeps it: it
is turned out of all towns and cities for a
dangerous thing; and every man that means to live
well endeavours to trust to himself and to live
without it.

First Murderer:
'Zounds, it is even now at my elbow, persuading me
not to kill the duke.

Second Murderer:
Take the devil in thy mind, and relieve him not: he
would insinuate with thee but to make thee sigh.

First Murderer:
Tut, I am strong-framed, he cannot prevail with me,
I warrant thee.

Second Murderer:
Spoke like a tail fellow that respects his
reputation. Come, shall we to this gear?

First Murderer:
Take him over the costard with the hilts of thy
sword, and then we will chop him in the malmsey-butt
in the next room.

Second Murderer:
O excellent devise! make a sop of him.

First Murderer:
Hark! he stirs: shall I strike?

Second Murderer:
No, first let's reason with him.

CLARENCE:
Where art thou, keeper? give me a cup of wine.

Second murderer:
You shall have wine enough, my lord, anon.

CLARENCE:
In God's name, what art thou?

Second Murderer:
A man, as you are.

CLARENCE:
But not, as I am, royal.

Second Murderer:
Nor you, as we are, loyal.

CLARENCE:
Thy voice is thunder, but thy looks are humble.

Second Murderer:
My voice is now the king's, my looks mine own.

CLARENCE:
How darkly and how deadly dost thou speak!
Your eyes do menace me: why look you pale?
Who sent you hither? Wherefore do you come?

Both:
To, to, to--

CLARENCE:
To murder me?

Both:
Ay, ay.

CLARENCE:
You scarcely have the hearts to tell me so,
And therefore cannot have the hearts to do it.
Wherein, my friends, have I offended you?

First Murderer:
Offended us you have not, but the king.

CLARENCE:
I shall be reconciled to him again.

Second Murderer:
Never, my lord; therefore prepare to die.

CLARENCE:
Are you call'd forth from out a world of men
To slay the innocent? What is my offence?
Where are the evidence that do accuse me?
What lawful quest have given their verdict up
Unto the frowning judge? or who pronounced
The bitter sentence of poor Clarence' death?
Before I be convict by course of law,
To threaten me with death is most unlawful.
I charge you, as you hope to have redemption
By Christ's dear blood shed for our grievous sins,
That you depart and lay no hands on me
The deed you undertake is damnable.

First Murderer:
What we will do, we do upon command.

Second Murderer:
And he that hath commanded is the king.

CLARENCE:
Erroneous vassal! the great King of kings
Hath in the tables of his law commanded
That thou shalt do no murder: and wilt thou, then,
Spurn at his edict and fulfil a man's?
Take heed; for he holds vengeance in his hands,
To hurl upon their heads that break his law.

Second Murderer:
And that same vengeance doth he hurl on thee,
For false forswearing and for murder too:
Thou didst receive the holy sacrament,
To fight in quarrel of the house of Lancaster.

First Murderer:
And, like a traitor to the name of God,
Didst break that vow; and with thy treacherous blade
Unrip'dst the bowels of thy sovereign's son.

Second Murderer:
Whom thou wert sworn to cherish and defend.

First Murderer:
How canst thou urge God's dreadful law to us,
When thou hast broke it in so dear degree?

CLARENCE:
Alas! for whose sake did I that ill deed?
For Edward, for my brother, for his sake: Why, sirs,
He sends ye not to murder me for this
For in this sin he is as deep as I.
If God will be revenged for this deed.
O, know you yet, he doth it publicly,
Take not the quarrel from his powerful arm;
He needs no indirect nor lawless course
To cut off those that have offended him.

First Murderer:
Who made thee, then, a bloody minister,
When gallant-springing brave Plantagenet,
That princely novice, was struck dead by thee?

CLARENCE:
My brother's love, the devil, and my rage.

First Murderer:
Thy brother's love, our duty, and thy fault,
Provoke us hither now to slaughter thee.

CLARENCE:
Oh, if you love my brother, hate not me;
I am his brother, and I love him well.
If you be hired for meed, go back again,
And I will send you to my brother Gloucester,
Who shall reward you better for my life
Than Edward will for tidings of my death.

Second Murderer:
You are deceived, your brother Gloucester hates you.

CLARENCE:
O, no, he loves me, and he holds me dear:
Go you to him from me.

Both:
Ay, so we will.

CLARENCE:
Tell him, when that our princely father York
Bless'd his three sons with his victorious arm,
And charged us from his soul to love each other,
He little thought of this divided friendship:
Bid Gloucester think of this, and he will weep.

First Murderer:
Ay, millstones; as be lesson'd us to weep.

CLARENCE:
O, do not slander him, for he is kind.

First Murderer:
Right,
As snow in harvest. Thou deceivest thyself:
'Tis he that sent us hither now to slaughter thee.

CLARENCE:
It cannot be; for when I parted with him,
He hugg'd me in his arms, and swore, with sobs,
That he would labour my delivery.

Second Murderer:
Why, so he doth, now he delivers thee
From this world's thraldom to the joys of heaven.

First Murderer:
Make peace with God, for you must die, my lord.

CLARENCE:
Hast thou that holy feeling in thy soul,
To counsel me to make my peace with God,
And art thou yet to thy own soul so blind,
That thou wilt war with God by murdering me?
Ah, sirs, consider, he that set you on
To do this deed will hate you for the deed.

Second Murderer:
What shall we do?

CLARENCE:
Relent, and save your souls.

First Murderer:
Relent! 'tis cowardly and womanish.

CLARENCE:
Not to relent is beastly, savage, devilish.
Which of you, if you were a prince's son,
Being pent from liberty, as I am now,
if two such murderers as yourselves came to you,
Would not entreat for life?
My friend, I spy some pity in thy looks:
O, if thine eye be not a flatterer,
Come thou on my side, and entreat for me,
As you would beg, were you in my distress
A begging prince what beggar pities not?

Second Murderer:
Look behind you, my lord.

First Murderer:
Take that, and that: if all this will not do,
I'll drown you in the malmsey-butt within.

Second Murderer:
A bloody deed, and desperately dispatch'd!
How fain, like Pilate, would I wash my hands
Of this most grievous guilty murder done!

First Murderer:
How now! what mean'st thou, that thou help'st me not?
By heavens, the duke shall know how slack thou art!

Second Murderer:
I would he knew that I had saved his brother!
Take thou the fee, and tell him what I say;
For I repent me that the duke is slain.

First Murderer:
So do not I: go, coward as thou art.
Now must I hide his body in some hole,
Until the duke take order for his burial:
And when I have my meed, I must away;
For this will out, and here I must not stay.

KING EDWARD IV:
Why, so: now have I done a good day's work:
You peers, continue this united league:
I every day expect an embassage
From my Redeemer to redeem me hence;
And now in peace my soul shall part to heaven,
Since I have set my friends at peace on earth.
Rivers and Hastings, take each other's hand;
Dissemble not your hatred, swear your love.

RIVERS:
By heaven, my heart is purged from grudging hate:
And with my hand I seal my true heart's love.

HASTINGS:
So thrive I, as I truly swear the like!

KING EDWARD IV:
Take heed you dally not before your king;
Lest he that is the supreme King of kings
Confound your hidden falsehood, and award
Either of you to be the other's end.

HASTINGS:
So prosper I, as I swear perfect love!

RIVERS:
And I, as I love Hastings with my heart!

KING EDWARD IV:
Madam, yourself are not exempt in this,
Nor your son Dorset, Buckingham, nor you;
You have been factious one against the other,
Wife, love Lord Hastings, let him kiss your hand;
And what you do, do it unfeignedly.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Here, Hastings; I will never more remember
Our former hatred, so thrive I and mine!

KING EDWARD IV:
Dorset, embrace him; Hastings, love lord marquess.

DORSET:
This interchange of love, I here protest,
Upon my part shall be unviolable.

HASTINGS:
And so swear I, my lord

KING EDWARD IV:
Now, princely Buckingham, seal thou this league
With thy embracements to my wife's allies,
And make me happy in your unity.

BUCKINGHAM:
Whenever Buckingham doth turn his hate
On you or yours,
but with all duteous love
Doth cherish you and yours, God punish me
With hate in those where I expect most love!
When I have most need to employ a friend,
And most assured that he is a friend
Deep, hollow, treacherous, and full of guile,
Be he unto me! this do I beg of God,
When I am cold in zeal to yours.

KING EDWARD IV:
A pleasing cordial, princely Buckingham,
is this thy vow unto my sickly heart.
There wanteth now our brother Gloucester here,
To make the perfect period of this peace.

BUCKINGHAM:
And, in good time, here comes the noble duke.

GLOUCESTER:
Good morrow to my sovereign king and queen:
And, princely peers, a happy time of day!

KING EDWARD IV:
Happy, indeed, as we have spent the day.
Brother, we done deeds of charity;
Made peace enmity, fair love of hate,
Between these swelling wrong-incensed peers.

GLOUCESTER:
A blessed labour, my most sovereign liege:
Amongst this princely heap, if any here,
By false intelligence, or wrong surmise,
Hold me a foe;
If I unwittingly, or in my rage,
Have aught committed that is hardly borne
By any in this presence, I desire
To reconcile me to his friendly peace:
'Tis death to me to be at enmity;
I hate it, and desire all good men's love.
First, madam, I entreat true peace of you,
Which I will purchase with my duteous service;
Of you, my noble cousin Buckingham,
If ever any grudge were lodged between us;
Of you, Lord Rivers, and, Lord Grey, of you;
That without desert have frown'd on me;
Dukes, earls, lords, gentlemen; indeed, of all.
I do not know that Englishman alive
With whom my soul is any jot at odds
More than the infant that is born to-night
I thank my God for my humility.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
A holy day shall this be kept hereafter:
I would to God all strifes were well compounded.
My sovereign liege, I do beseech your majesty
To take our brother Clarence to your grace.

GLOUCESTER:
Why, madam, have I offer'd love for this
To be so bouted in this royal presence?
Who knows not that the noble duke is dead?
You do him injury to scorn his corse.

RIVERS:
Who knows not he is dead! who knows he is?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
All seeing heaven, what a world is this!

BUCKINGHAM:
Look I so pale, Lord Dorset, as the rest?

DORSET:
Ay, my good lord; and no one in this presence
But his red colour hath forsook his cheeks.

KING EDWARD IV:
Is Clarence dead? the order was reversed.

GLOUCESTER:
But he, poor soul, by your first order died,
And that a winged Mercury did bear:
Some tardy cripple bore the countermand,
That came too lag to see him buried.
God grant that some, less noble and less loyal,
Nearer in bloody thoughts, but not in blood,
Deserve not worse than wretched Clarence did,
And yet go current from suspicion!

DORSET:
A boon, my sovereign, for my service done!

KING EDWARD IV:
I pray thee, peace: my soul is full of sorrow.

DORSET:
I will not rise, unless your highness grant.

KING EDWARD IV:
Then speak at once what is it thou demand'st.

DORSET:
The forfeit, sovereign, of my servant's life;
Who slew to-day a righteous gentleman
Lately attendant on the Duke of Norfolk.

KING EDWARD IV:
Have a tongue to doom my brother's death,
And shall the same give pardon to a slave?
My brother slew no man; his fault was thought,
And yet his punishment was cruel death.
Who sued to me for him? who, in my rage,
Kneel'd at my feet, and bade me be advised
Who spake of brotherhood? who spake of love?
Who told me how the poor soul did forsake
The mighty Warwick, and did fight for me?
Who told me, in the field by Tewksbury
When Oxford had me down, he rescued me,
And said, 'Dear brother, live, and be a king'?
Who told me, when we both lay in the field
Frozen almost to death, how he did lap me
Even in his own garments, and gave himself,
All thin and naked, to the numb cold night?
All this from my remembrance brutish wrath
Sinfully pluck'd, and not a man of you
Had so much grace to put it in my mind.
But when your carters or your waiting-vassals
Have done a drunken slaughter, and defaced
The precious image of our dear Redeemer,
You straight are on your knees for pardon, pardon;
And I unjustly too, must grant it you
But for my brother not a man would speak,
Nor I, ungracious, speak unto myself
For him, poor soul. The proudest of you all
Have been beholding to him in his life;
Yet none of you would once plead for his life.
O God, I fear thy justice will take hold
On me, and you, and mine, and yours for this!
Come, Hastings, help me to my closet.
Oh, poor Clarence!

GLOUCESTER:
This is the fruit of rashness! Mark'd you not
How that the guilty kindred of the queen
Look'd pale when they did hear of Clarence' death?
O, they did urge it still unto the king!
God will revenge it. But come, let us in,
To comfort Edward with our company.

BUCKINGHAM:
We wait upon your grace.

Boy:
Tell me, good grandam, is our father dead?

DUCHESS OF YORK:
No, boy.

Boy:
Why do you wring your hands, and beat your breast,
And cry 'O Clarence, my unhappy son!'

Girl:
Why do you look on us, and shake your head,
And call us wretches, orphans, castaways
If that our noble father be alive?

DUCHESS OF YORK:
My pretty cousins, you mistake me much;
I do lament the sickness of the king.
As loath to lose him, not your father's death;
It were lost sorrow to wail one that's lost.

Boy:
Then, grandam, you conclude that he is dead.
The king my uncle is to blame for this:
God will revenge it; whom I will importune
With daily prayers all to that effect.

Girl:
And so will I.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Peace, children, peace! the king doth love you well:
Incapable and shallow innocents,
You cannot guess who caused your father's death.

Boy:
Grandam, we can; for my good uncle Gloucester
Told me, the king, provoked by the queen,
Devised impeachments to imprison him :
And when my uncle told me so, he wept,
And hugg'd me in his arm, and kindly kiss'd my cheek;
Bade me rely on him as on my father,
And he would love me dearly as his child.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Oh, that deceit should steal such gentle shapes,
And with a virtuous vizard hide foul guile!
He is my son; yea, and therein my shame;
Yet from my dugs he drew not this deceit.

Boy:
Think you my uncle did dissemble, grandam?

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Ay, boy.

Boy:
I cannot think it. Hark! what noise is this?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Oh, who shall hinder me to wail and weep,
To chide my fortune, and torment myself?
I'll join with black despair against my soul,
And to myself become an enemy.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
What means this scene of rude impatience?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
To make an act of tragic violence:
Edward, my lord, your son, our king, is dead.
Why grow the branches now the root is wither'd?
Why wither not the leaves the sap being gone?
If you will live, lament; if die, be brief,
That our swift-winged souls may catch the king's;
Or, like obedient subjects, follow him
To his new kingdom of perpetual rest.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Ah, so much interest have I in thy sorrow
As I had title in thy noble husband!
I have bewept a worthy husband's death,
And lived by looking on his images:
But now two mirrors of his princely semblance
Are crack'd in pieces by malignant death,
And I for comfort have but one false glass,
Which grieves me when I see my shame in him.
Thou art a widow; yet thou art a mother,
And hast the comfort of thy children left thee:
But death hath snatch'd my husband from mine arms,
And pluck'd two crutches from my feeble limbs,
Edward and Clarence. O, what cause have I,
Thine being but a moiety of my grief,
To overgo thy plaints and drown thy cries!

Boy:
Good aunt, you wept not for our father's death;
How can we aid you with our kindred tears?

Girl:
Our fatherless distress was left unmoan'd;
Your widow-dolour likewise be unwept!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Give me no help in lamentation;
I am not barren to bring forth complaints
All springs reduce their currents to mine eyes,
That I, being govern'd by the watery moon,
May send forth plenteous tears to drown the world!


--- End of file: shakespear_04.txt ---

Oh for my husband, for my dear lord Edward!

Children:
Oh for our father, for our dear lord Clarence!

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Alas for both, both mine, Edward and Clarence!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
What stay had I but Edward? and he's gone.

Children:
What stay had we but Clarence? and he's gone.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
What stays had I but they? and they are gone.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Was never widow had so dear a loss!

Children:
Were never orphans had so dear a loss!

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Was never mother had so dear a loss!
Alas, I am the mother of these moans!
Their woes are parcell'd, mine are general.
She for an Edward weeps, and so do I;
I for a Clarence weep, so doth not she:
These babes for Clarence weep and so do I;
I for an Edward weep, so do not they:
Alas, you three, on me, threefold distress'd,
Pour all your tears! I am your sorrow's nurse,
And I will pamper it with lamentations.

DORSET:
Comfort, dear mother: God is much displeased
That you take with unthankfulness, his doing:
In common worldly things, 'tis call'd ungrateful,
With dull unwilligness to repay a debt
Which with a bounteous hand was kindly lent;
Much more to be thus opposite with heaven,
For it requires the royal debt it lent you.

RIVERS:
Madam, bethink you, like a careful mother,
Of the young prince your son: send straight for him
Let him be crown'd; in him your comfort lives:
Drown desperate sorrow in dead Edward's grave,
And plant your joys in living Edward's throne.

GLOUCESTER:
Madam, have comfort: all of us have cause
To wail the dimming of our shining star;
But none can cure their harms by wailing them.
Madam, my mother, I do cry you mercy;
I did not see your grace: humbly on my knee
I crave your blessing.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
God bless thee; and put meekness in thy mind,
Love, charity, obedience, and true duty!

GLOUCESTER:

BUCKINGHAM:
You cloudy princes and heart-sorrowing peers,
That bear this mutual heavy load of moan,
Now cheer each other in each other's love
Though we have spent our harvest of this king,
We are to reap the harvest of his son.
The broken rancour of your high-swoln hearts,
But lately splinter'd, knit, and join'd together,
Must gently be preserved, cherish'd, and kept:
Me seemeth good, that, with some little train,
Forthwith from Ludlow the young prince be fetch'd
Hither to London, to be crown'd our king.

RIVERS:
Why with some little train, my Lord of Buckingham?

BUCKINGHAM:
Marry, my lord, lest, by a multitude,
The new-heal'd wound of malice should break out,
Which would be so much the more dangerous
By how much the estate is green and yet ungovern'd:
Where every horse bears his commanding rein,
And may direct his course as please himself,
As well the fear of harm, as harm apparent,
In my opinion, ought to be prevented.

GLOUCESTER:
I hope the king made peace with all of us
And the compact is firm and true in me.

RIVERS:
And so in me; and so, I think, in all:
Yet, since it is but green, it should be put
To no apparent likelihood of breach,
Which haply by much company might be urged:
Therefore I say with noble Buckingham,
That it is meet so few should fetch the prince.

HASTINGS:
And so say I.

GLOUCESTER:
Then be it so; and go we to determine
Who they shall be that straight shall post to Ludlow.
Madam, and you, my mother, will you go
To give your censures in this weighty business?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
With all our harts.

BUCKINGHAM:
My lord, whoever journeys to the Prince,
For God's sake, let not us two be behind;
For, by the way, I'll sort occasion,
As index to the story we late talk'd of,
To part the queen's proud kindred from the king.

GLOUCESTER:
My other self, my counsel's consistory,
My oracle, my prophet! My dear cousin,
I, like a child, will go by thy direction.
Towards Ludlow then, for we'll not stay behind.

First Citizen:
Neighbour, well met: whither away so fast?

Second Citizen:
I promise you, I scarcely know myself:
Hear you the news abroad?

First Citizen:
Ay, that the king is dead.

Second Citizen:
Bad news, by'r lady; seldom comes the better:
I fear, I fear 'twill prove a troublous world.

Third Citizen:
Neighbours, God speed!

First Citizen:
Give you good morrow, sir.

Third Citizen:
Doth this news hold of good King Edward's death?

Second Citizen:
Ay, sir, it is too true; God help the while!

Third Citizen:
Then, masters, look to see a troublous world.

First Citizen:
No, no; by God's good grace his son shall reign.

Third Citizen:
Woe to the land that's govern'd by a child!

Second Citizen:
In him there is a hope of government,
That in his nonage council under him,
And in his full and ripen'd years himself,
No doubt, shall then and till then govern well.

First Citizen:
So stood the state when Henry the Sixth
Was crown'd in Paris but at nine months old.

Third Citizen:
Stood the state so? No, no, good friends, God wot;
For then this land was famously enrich'd
With politic grave counsel; then the king
Had virtuous uncles to protect his grace.

First Citizen:
Why, so hath this, both by the father and mother.

Third Citizen:
Better it were they all came by the father,
Or by the father there were none at all;
For emulation now, who shall be nearest,
Will touch us all too near, if God prevent not.
O, full of danger is the Duke of Gloucester!
And the queen's sons and brothers haught and proud:
And were they to be ruled, and not to rule,
This sickly land might solace as before.

First Citizen:
Come, come, we fear the worst; all shall be well.

Third Citizen:
When clouds appear, wise men put on their cloaks;
When great leaves fall, the winter is at hand;
When the sun sets, who doth not look for night?
Untimely storms make men expect a dearth.
All may be well; but, if God sort it so,
'Tis more than we deserve, or I expect.

Second Citizen:
Truly, the souls of men are full of dread:
Ye cannot reason almost with a man
That looks not heavily and full of fear.

Third Citizen:
Before the times of change, still is it so:
By a divine instinct men's minds mistrust
Ensuing dangers; as by proof, we see
The waters swell before a boisterous storm.
But leave it all to God. whither away?

Second Citizen:
Marry, we were sent for to the justices.

Third Citizen:
And so was I: I'll bear you company.

ARCHBISHOP OF YORK:
Last night, I hear, they lay at Northampton;
At Stony-Stratford will they be to-night:
To-morrow, or next day, they will be here.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
I long with all my heart to see the prince:
I hope he is much grown since last I saw him.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
But I hear, no; they say my son of York
Hath almost overta'en him in his growth.

YORK:
Ay, mother; but I would not have it so.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Why, my young cousin, it is good to grow.

YORK:
Grandam, one night, as we did sit at supper,
My uncle Rivers talk'd how I did grow
More than my brother: 'Ay,' quoth my uncle
Gloucester,
'Small herbs have grace, great weeds do grow apace:'
And since, methinks, I would not grow so fast,
Because sweet flowers are slow and weeds make haste.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Good faith, good faith, the saying did not hold
In him that did object the same to thee;
He was the wretched'st thing when he was young,
So long a-growing and so leisurely,
That, if this rule were true, he should be gracious.

ARCHBISHOP OF YORK:
Why, madam, so, no doubt, he is.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
I hope he is; but yet let mothers doubt.

YORK:
Now, by my troth, if I had been remember'd,
I could have given my uncle's grace a flout,
To touch his growth nearer than he touch'd mine.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
How, my pretty York? I pray thee, let me hear it.

YORK:
Marry, they say my uncle grew so fast
That he could gnaw a crust at two hours old
'Twas full two years ere I could get a tooth.
Grandam, this would have been a biting jest.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
I pray thee, pretty York, who told thee this?

YORK:
Grandam, his nurse.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
His nurse! why, she was dead ere thou wert born.

YORK:
If 'twere not she, I cannot tell who told me.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
A parlous boy: go to, you are too shrewd.

ARCHBISHOP OF YORK:
Good madam, be not angry with the child.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Pitchers have ears.

ARCHBISHOP OF YORK:
Here comes a messenger. What news?

Messenger:
Such news, my lord, as grieves me to unfold.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
How fares the prince?

Messenger:
Well, madam, and in health.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
What is thy news then?

Messenger:
Lord Rivers and Lord Grey are sent to Pomfret,
With them Sir Thomas Vaughan, prisoners.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Who hath committed them?

Messenger:
The mighty dukes
Gloucester and Buckingham.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
For what offence?

Messenger:
The sum of all I can, I have disclosed;
Why or for what these nobles were committed
Is all unknown to me, my gracious lady.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Ay me, I see the downfall of our house!
The tiger now hath seized the gentle hind;
Insulting tyranny begins to jet
Upon the innocent and aweless throne:
Welcome, destruction, death, and massacre!
I see, as in a map, the end of all.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Accursed and unquiet wrangling days,
How many of you have mine eyes beheld!
My husband lost his life to get the crown;
And often up and down my sons were toss'd,
For me to joy and weep their gain and loss:
And being seated, and domestic broils
Clean over-blown, themselves, the conquerors.
Make war upon themselves; blood against blood,
Self against self: O, preposterous
And frantic outrage, end thy damned spleen;
Or let me die, to look on death no more!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Come, come, my boy; we will to sanctuary.
Madam, farewell.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
I'll go along with you.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
You have no cause.

ARCHBISHOP OF YORK:
My gracious lady, go;
And thither bear your treasure and your goods.
For my part, I'll resign unto your grace
The seal I keep: and so betide to me
As well I tender you and all of yours!
Come, I'll conduct you to the sanctuary.

BUCKINGHAM:
Welcome, sweet prince, to London, to your chamber.

GLOUCESTER:
Welcome, dear cousin, my thoughts' sovereign
The weary way hath made you melancholy.

PRINCE EDWARD:
No, uncle; but our crosses on the way
Have made it tedious, wearisome, and heavy
I want more uncles here to welcome me.

GLOUCESTER:
Sweet prince, the untainted virtue of your years
Hath not yet dived into the world's deceit
Nor more can you distinguish of a man
Than of his outward show; which, God he knows,
Seldom or never jumpeth with the heart.
Those uncles which you want were dangerous;
Your grace attended to their sugar'd words,
But look'd not on the poison of their hearts :
God keep you from them, and from such false friends!

PRINCE EDWARD:
God keep me from false friends! but they were none.

GLOUCESTER:
My lord, the mayor of London comes to greet you.

Lord Mayor:
God bless your grace with health and happy days!

PRINCE EDWARD:
I thank you, good my lord; and thank you all.
I thought my mother, and my brother York,
Would long ere this have met us on the way
Fie, what a slug is Hastings, that he comes not
To tell us whether they will come or no!

BUCKINGHAM:
And, in good time, here comes the sweating lord.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Welcome, my lord: what, will our mother come?

HASTINGS:
On what occasion, God he knows, not I,
The queen your mother, and your brother York,
Have taken sanctuary: the tender prince
Would fain have come with me to meet your grace,
But by his mother was perforce withheld.

BUCKINGHAM:
Fie, what an indirect and peevish course
Is this of hers! Lord cardinal, will your grace
Persuade the queen to send the Duke of York
Unto his princely brother presently?
If she deny, Lord Hastings, go with him,
And from her jealous arms pluck him perforce.

CARDINAL:
My Lord of Buckingham, if my weak oratory
Can from his mother win the Duke of York,
Anon expect him here; but if she be obdurate
To mild entreaties, God in heaven forbid
We should infringe the holy privilege
Of blessed sanctuary! not for all this land
Would I be guilty of so deep a sin.

BUCKINGHAM:
You are too senseless--obstinate, my lord,
Too ceremonious and traditional
Weigh it but with the grossness of this age,
You break not sanctuary in seizing him.
The benefit thereof is always granted
To those whose dealings have deserved the place,
And those who have the wit to claim the place:
This prince hath neither claim'd it nor deserved it;
And therefore, in mine opinion, cannot have it:
Then, taking him from thence that is not there,
You break no privilege nor charter there.
Oft have I heard of sanctuary men;
But sanctuary children ne'er till now.

CARDINAL:
My lord, you shall o'er-rule my mind for once.
Come on, Lord Hastings, will you go with me?

HASTINGS:
I go, my lord.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Good lords, make all the speedy haste you may.
Say, uncle Gloucester, if our brother come,
Where shall we sojourn till our coronation?

GLOUCESTER:
Where it seems best unto your royal self.
If I may counsel you, some day or two
Your highness shall repose you at the Tower:
Then where you please, and shall be thought most fit
For your best health and recreation.

PRINCE EDWARD:
I do not like the Tower, of any place.
Did Julius Caesar build that place, my lord?

BUCKINGHAM:
He did, my gracious lord, begin that place;
Which, since, succeeding ages have re-edified.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Is it upon record, or else reported
Successively from age to age, he built it?

BUCKINGHAM:
Upon record, my gracious lord.

PRINCE EDWARD:
But say, my lord, it were not register'd,
Methinks the truth should live from age to age,
As 'twere retail'd to all posterity,
Even to the general all-ending day.

GLOUCESTER:

PRINCE EDWARD:
What say you, uncle?

GLOUCESTER:
I say, without characters, fame lives long.
Thus, like the formal vice, Iniquity,
I moralize two meanings in one word.

PRINCE EDWARD:
That Julius Caesar was a famous man;
With what his valour did enrich his wit,
His wit set down to make his valour live
Death makes no conquest of this conqueror;
For now he lives in fame, though not in life.
I'll tell you what, my cousin Buckingham,--

BUCKINGHAM:
What, my gracious lord?

PRINCE EDWARD:
An if I live until I be a man,
I'll win our ancient right in France again,
Or die a soldier, as I lived a king.

GLOUCESTER:

BUCKINGHAM:
Now, in good time, here comes the Duke of York.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Richard of York! how fares our loving brother?

YORK:
Well, my dread lord; so must I call you now.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Ay, brother, to our grief, as it is yours:
Too late he died that might have kept that title,
Which by his death hath lost much majesty.

GLOUCESTER:
How fares our cousin, noble Lord of York?

YORK:
I thank you, gentle uncle. O, my lord,
You said that idle weeds are fast in growth
The prince my brother hath outgrown me far.

GLOUCESTER:
He hath, my lord.

YORK:
And therefore is he idle?

GLOUCESTER:
O, my fair cousin, I must not say so.

YORK:
Then is he more beholding to you than I.

GLOUCESTER:
He may command me as my sovereign;
But you have power in me as in a kinsman.

YORK:
I pray you, uncle, give me this dagger.

GLOUCESTER:
My dagger, little cousin? with all my heart.

PRINCE EDWARD:
A beggar, brother?

YORK:
Of my kind uncle, that I know will give;
And being but a toy, which is no grief to give.

GLOUCESTER:
A greater gift than that I'll give my cousin.

YORK:
A greater gift! O, that's the sword to it.

GLOUCESTER:
A gentle cousin, were it light enough.

YORK:
O, then, I see, you will part but with light gifts;
In weightier things you'll say a beggar nay.

GLOUCESTER:
It is too heavy for your grace to wear.

YORK:
I weigh it lightly, were it heavier.

GLOUCESTER:
What, would you have my weapon, little lord?

YORK:
I would, that I might thank you as you call me.

GLOUCESTER:
How?

YORK:
Little.

PRINCE EDWARD:
My Lord of York will still be cross in talk:
Uncle, your grace knows how to bear with him.

YORK:
You mean, to bear me, not to bear with me:
Uncle, my brother mocks both you and me;
Because that I am little, like an ape,
He thinks that you should bear me on your shoulders.

BUCKINGHAM:
With what a sharp-provided wit he reasons!
To mitigate the scorn he gives his uncle,
He prettily and aptly taunts himself:
So cunning and so young is wonderful.

GLOUCESTER:
My lord, will't please you pass along?
Myself and my good cousin Buckingham
Will to your mother, to entreat of her
To meet you at the Tower and welcome you.

YORK:
What, will you go unto the Tower, my lord?

PRINCE EDWARD:
My lord protector needs will have it so.

YORK:
I shall not sleep in quiet at the Tower.

GLOUCESTER:
Why, what should you fear?

YORK:
Marry, my uncle Clarence' angry ghost:
My grandam told me he was murdered there.

PRINCE EDWARD:
I fear no uncles dead.

GLOUCESTER:
Nor none that live, I hope.

PRINCE EDWARD:
An if they live, I hope I need not fear.
But come, my lord; and with a heavy heart,
Thinking on them, go I unto the Tower.

BUCKINGHAM:
Think you, my lord, this little prating York
Was not incensed by his subtle mother
To taunt and scorn you thus opprobriously?

GLOUCESTER:
No doubt, no doubt; O, 'tis a parlous boy;
Bold, quick, ingenious, forward, capable
He is all the mother's, from the top to toe.

BUCKINGHAM:
Well, let them rest. Come hither, Catesby.
Thou art sworn as deeply to effect what we intend
As closely to conceal what we impart:
Thou know'st our reasons urged upon the way;
What think'st thou? is it not an easy matter
To make William Lord Hastings of our mind,
For the instalment of this noble duke
In the seat royal of this famous isle?

CATESBY:
He for his father's sake so loves the prince,
That he will not be won to aught against him.

BUCKINGHAM:
What think'st thou, then, of Stanley? what will he?

CATESBY:
He will do all in all as Hastings doth.

BUCKINGHAM:
Well, then, no more but this: go, gentle Catesby,
And, as it were far off sound thou Lord Hastings,
How doth he stand affected to our purpose;
And summon him to-morrow to the Tower,
To sit about the coronation.
If thou dost find him tractable to us,
Encourage him, and show him all our reasons:
If he be leaden, icy-cold, unwilling,
Be thou so too; and so break off your talk,
And give us notice of his inclination:
For we to-morrow hold divided councils,
Wherein thyself shalt highly be employ'd.

GLOUCESTER:
Commend me to Lord William: tell him, Catesby,
His ancient knot of dangerous adversaries
To-morrow are let blood at Pomfret-castle;
And bid my friend, for joy of this good news,
Give mistress Shore one gentle kiss the more.

BUCKINGHAM:
Good Catesby, go, effect this business soundly.

CATESBY:
My good lords both, with all the heed I may.

GLOUCESTER:
Shall we hear from you, Catesby, ere we sleep?

CATESBY:
You shall, my lord.

GLOUCESTER:
At Crosby Place, there shall you find us both.

BUCKINGHAM:
Now, my lord, what shall we do, if we perceive
Lord Hastings will not yield to our complots?

GLOUCESTER:
Chop off his head, man; somewhat we will do:
And, look, when I am king, claim thou of me
The earldom of Hereford, and the moveables
Whereof the king my brother stood possess'd.

BUCKINGHAM:
I'll claim that promise at your grace's hands.

GLOUCESTER:
And look to have it yielded with all willingness.
Come, let us sup betimes, that afterwards
We may digest our complots in some form.

Messenger:
What, ho! my lord!

HASTINGS:

Messenger:
A messenger from the Lord Stanley.

HASTINGS:
What is't o'clock?

Messenger:
Upon the stroke of four.

HASTINGS:
Cannot thy master sleep these tedious nights?

Messenger:
So it should seem by that I have to say.
First, he commends him to your noble lordship.

HASTINGS:
And then?

Messenger:
And then he sends you word
He dreamt to-night the boar had razed his helm:
Besides, he says there are two councils held;
And that may be determined at the one
which may make you and him to rue at the other.
Therefore he sends to know your lordship's pleasure,
If presently you will take horse with him,
And with all speed post with him toward the north,
To shun the danger that his soul divines.

HASTINGS:
Go, fellow, go, return unto thy lord;
Bid him not fear the separated councils
His honour and myself are at the one,
And at the other is my servant Catesby
Where nothing can proceed that toucheth us
Whereof I shall not have intelligence.
Tell him his fears are shallow, wanting instance:
And for his dreams, I wonder he is so fond
To trust the mockery of unquiet slumbers
To fly the boar before the boar pursues,
Were to incense the boar to follow us
And make pursuit where he did mean no chase.
Go, bid thy master rise and come to me
And we will both together to the Tower,
Where, he shall see, the boar will use us kindly.

Messenger:
My gracious lord, I'll tell him what you say.

CATESBY:
Many good morrows to my noble lord!

HASTINGS:
Good morrow, Catesby; you are early stirring
What news, what news, in this our tottering state?

CATESBY:
It is a reeling world, indeed, my lord;
And I believe twill never stand upright
Tim Richard wear the garland of the realm.

HASTINGS:
How! wear the garland! dost thou mean the crown?

CATESBY:
Ay, my good lord.

HASTINGS:
I'll have this crown of mine cut from my shoulders
Ere I will see the crown so foul misplaced.
But canst thou guess that he doth aim at it?

CATESBY:
Ay, on my life; and hopes to find forward
Upon his party for the gain thereof:
And thereupon he sends you this good news,
That this same very day your enemies,
The kindred of the queen, must die at Pomfret.

HASTINGS:
Indeed, I am no mourner for that news,
Because they have been still mine enemies:
But, that I'll give my voice on Richard's side,
To bar my master's heirs in true descent,
God knows I will not do it, to the death.

CATESBY:
God keep your lordship in that gracious mind!

HASTINGS:
But I shall laugh at this a twelve-month hence,
That they who brought me in my master's hate
I live to look upon their tragedy.
I tell thee, Catesby--

CATESBY:
What, my lord?

HASTINGS:
Ere a fortnight make me elder,
I'll send some packing that yet think not on it.

CATESBY:
'Tis a vile thing to die, my gracious lord,
When men are unprepared and look not for it.

HASTINGS:
O monstrous, monstrous! and so falls it out
With Rivers, Vaughan, Grey: and so 'twill do
With some men else, who think themselves as safe
As thou and I; who, as thou know'st, are dear
To princely Richard and to Buckingham.

CATESBY:
The princes both make high account of you;
For they account his head upon the bridge.

HASTINGS:
I know they do; and I have well deserved it.
Come on, come on; where is your boar-spear, man?
Fear you the boar, and go so unprovided?

STANLEY:
My lord, good morrow; good morrow, Catesby:
You may jest on, but, by the holy rood,
I do not like these several councils, I.

HASTINGS:
My lord,
I hold my life as dear as you do yours;
And never in my life, I do protest,
Was it more precious to me than 'tis now:
Think you, but that I know our state secure,
I would be so triumphant as I am?

STANLEY:
The lords at Pomfret, when they rode from London,
Were jocund, and supposed their state was sure,
And they indeed had no cause to mistrust;
But yet, you see how soon the day o'ercast.
This sudden stag of rancour I misdoubt:
Pray God, I say, I prove a needless coward!
What, shall we toward the Tower? the day is spent.

HASTINGS:
Come, come, have with you. Wot you what, my lord?
To-day the lords you talk of are beheaded.

LORD STANLEY:
They, for their truth, might better wear their heads
Than some that have accused them wear their hats.
But come, my lord, let us away.

HASTINGS:
Go on before; I'll talk with this good fellow.
How now, sirrah! how goes the world with thee?

Pursuivant:
The better that your lordship please to ask.

HASTINGS:
I tell thee, man, 'tis better with me now
Than when I met thee last where now we meet:
Then was I going prisoner to the Tower,
By the suggestion of the queen's allies;
But now, I tell thee--keep it to thyself--
This day those enemies are put to death,
And I in better state than e'er I was.

Pursuivant:
God hold it, to your honour's good content!

HASTINGS:
Gramercy, fellow: there, drink that for me.

Pursuivant:
God save your lordship!

Priest:
Well met, my lord; I am glad to see your honour.

HASTINGS:
I thank thee, good Sir John, with all my heart.
I am in your debt for your last exercise;
Come the next Sabbath, and I will content you.

BUCKINGHAM:
What, talking with a priest, lord chamberlain?
Your friends at Pomfret, they do need the priest;
Your honour hath no shriving work in hand.

HASTINGS:
Good faith, and when I met this holy man,
Those men you talk of came into my mind.
What, go you toward the Tower?

BUCKINGHAM:
I do, my lord; but long I shall not stay
I shall return before your lordship thence.

HASTINGS:
'Tis like enough, for I stay dinner there.

BUCKINGHAM:

HASTINGS:
I'll wait upon your lordship.

RATCLIFF:
Come, bring forth the prisoners.

RIVERS:
Sir Richard Ratcliff, let me tell thee this:
To-day shalt thou behold a subject die
For truth, for duty, and for loyalty.

GREY:
God keep the prince from all the pack of you!
A knot you are of damned blood-suckers!

VAUGHAN:
You live that shall cry woe for this after.

RATCLIFF:
Dispatch; the limit of your lives is out.

RIVERS:
O Pomfret, Pomfret! O thou bloody prison,
Fatal and ominous to noble peers!
Within the guilty closure of thy walls
Richard the second here was hack'd to death;
And, for more slander to thy dismal seat,
We give thee up our guiltless blood to drink.

GREY:
Now Margaret's curse is fall'n upon our heads,
For standing by when Richard stabb'd her son.

RIVERS:
Then cursed she Hastings, then cursed she Buckingham,
Then cursed she Richard. O, remember, God
To hear her prayers for them, as now for us
And for my sister and her princely sons,
Be satisfied, dear God, with our true blood,
Which, as thou know'st, unjustly must be spilt.

RATCLIFF:
Make haste; the hour of death is expiate.

RIVERS:
Come, Grey, come, Vaughan, let us all embrace:
And take our leave, until we meet in heaven.

HASTINGS:
My lords, at once: the cause why we are met
Is, to determine of the coronation.
In God's name, speak: when is the royal day?

BUCKINGHAM:
Are all things fitting for that royal time?

DERBY:
It is, and wants but nomination.

BISHOP OF ELY:
To-morrow, then, I judge a happy day.

BUCKINGHAM:
Who knows the lord protector's mind herein?
Who is most inward with the royal duke?

BISHOP OF ELY:
Your grace, we think, should soonest know his mind.

BUCKINGHAM:
Who, I, my lord I we know each other's faces,
But for our hearts, he knows no more of mine,
Than I of yours;
Nor I no more of his, than you of mine.
Lord Hastings, you and he are near in love.

HASTINGS:
I thank his grace, I know he loves me well;
But, for his purpose in the coronation.
I have not sounded him, nor he deliver'd
His gracious pleasure any way therein:
But you, my noble lords, may name the time;
And in the duke's behalf I'll give my voice,
Which, I presume, he'll take in gentle part.

BISHOP OF ELY:
Now in good time, here comes the duke himself.

GLOUCESTER:
My noble lords and cousins all, good morrow.
I have been long a sleeper; but, I hope,
My absence doth neglect no great designs,
Which by my presence might have been concluded.

BUCKINGHAM:
Had not you come upon your cue, my lord
William Lord Hastings had pronounced your part,--
I mean, your voice,--for crowning of the king.

GLOUCESTER:
Than my Lord Hastings no man might be bolder;
His lordship knows me well, and loves me well.

HASTINGS:
I thank your grace.

GLOUCESTER:
My lord of Ely!

BISHOP OF ELY:
My lord?

GLOUCESTER:
When I was last in Holborn,
I saw good strawberries in your garden there
I do beseech you send for some of them.

BISHOP OF ELY:
Marry, and will, my lord, with all my heart.

GLOUCESTER:
Cousin of Buckingham, a word with you.
Catesby hath sounded Hastings in our business,
And finds the testy gentleman so hot,
As he will lose his head ere give consent
His master's son, as worshipful as he terms it,
Shall lose the royalty of England's throne.

BUCKINGHAM:
Withdraw you hence, my lord, I'll follow you.

DERBY:
We have not yet set down this day of triumph.
To-morrow, in mine opinion, is too sudden;
For I myself am not so well provided
As else I would be, were the day prolong'd.

BISHOP OF ELY:
Where is my lord protector? I have sent for these
strawberries.

HASTINGS:
His grace looks cheerfully and smooth to-day;
There's some conceit or other likes him well,
When he doth bid good morrow with such a spirit.
I think there's never a man in Christendom
That can less hide his love or hate than he;
For by his face straight shall you know his heart.

DERBY:
What of his heart perceive you in his face
By any likelihood he show'd to-day?

HASTINGS:
Marry, that with no man here he is offended;
For, were he, he had shown it in his looks.

DERBY:
I pray God he be not, I say.

GLOUCESTER:
I pray you all, tell me what they deserve
That do conspire my death with devilish plots
Of damned witchcraft, and that have prevail'd
Upon my body with their hellish charms?

HASTINGS:
The tender love I bear your grace, my lord,
Makes me most forward in this noble presence
To doom the offenders, whatsoever they be
I say, my lord, they have deserved death.

GLOUCESTER:
Then be your eyes the witness of this ill:
See how I am bewitch'd; behold mine arm
Is, like a blasted sapling, wither'd up:
And this is Edward's wife, that monstrous witch,
Consorted with that harlot strumpet Shore,
That by their witchcraft thus have marked me.

HASTINGS:
If they have done this thing, my gracious lord--

GLOUCESTER:
If I thou protector of this damned strumpet--
Tellest thou me of 'ifs'?  Thou art a traitor:
Off with his head! Now, by Saint Paul I swear,
I will not dine until I see the same.
Lovel and Ratcliff, look that it be done:
The rest, that love me, rise and follow me.

HASTINGS:
Woe, woe for England! not a whit for me;
For I, too fond, might have prevented this.
Stanley did dream the boar did raze his helm;
But I disdain'd it, and did scorn to fly:
Three times to-day my foot-cloth horse did stumble,
And startled, when he look'd upon the Tower,
As loath to bear me to the slaughter-house.
O, now I want the priest that spake to me:
I now repent I told the pursuivant
As 'twere triumphing at mine enemies,
How they at Pomfret bloodily were butcher'd,
And I myself secure in grace and favour.
O Margaret, Margaret, now thy heavy curse
Is lighted on poor Hastings' wretched head!

RATCLIFF:
Dispatch, my lord; the duke would be at dinner:
Make a short shrift; he longs to see your head.

HASTINGS:
O momentary grace of mortal men,
Which we more hunt for than the grace of God!
Who builds his hopes in air of your good looks,
Lives like a drunken sailor on a mast,
Ready, with every nod, to tumble down
Into the fatal bowels of the deep.

LOVEL:
Come, come, dispatch; 'tis bootless to exclaim.

HASTINGS:
O bloody Richard! miserable England!
I prophesy the fearful'st time to thee
That ever wretched age hath look'd upon.
Come, lead me to the block; bear him my head.
They smile at me that shortly shall be dead.

GLOUCESTER:
Come, cousin, canst thou quake, and change thy colour,
Murder thy breath in the middle of a word,
And then begin again, and stop again,
As if thou wert distraught and mad with terror?

BUCKINGHAM:
Tut, I can counterfeit the deep tragedian;
Speak and look back, and pry on every side,
Tremble and start at wagging of a straw,
Intending deep suspicion: ghastly looks
Are at my service, like enforced smiles;
And both are ready in their offices,
At any time, to grace my stratagems.
But what, is Catesby gone?

GLOUCESTER:
He is; and, see, he brings the mayor along.

BUCKINGHAM:
Lord mayor,--

GLOUCESTER:
Look to the drawbridge there!

BUCKINGHAM:
Hark! a drum.

GLOUCESTER:
Catesby, o'erlook the walls.

BUCKINGHAM:
Lord mayor, the reason we have sent--

GLOUCESTER:
Look back, defend thee, here are enemies.

BUCKINGHAM:
God and our innocency defend and guard us!

GLOUCESTER:
Be patient, they are friends, Ratcliff and Lovel.

LOVEL:
Here is the head of that ignoble traitor,
The dangerous and unsuspected Hastings.

GLOUCESTER:
So dear I loved the man, that I must weep.
I took him for the plainest harmless creature
That breathed upon this earth a Christian;
Made him my book wherein my soul recorded
The history of all her secret thoughts:
So smooth he daub'd his vice with show of virtue,
That, his apparent open guilt omitted,
I mean, his conversation with Shore's wife,
He lived from all attainder of suspect.

BUCKINGHAM:
Well, well, he was the covert'st shelter'd traitor
That ever lived.
Would you imagine, or almost believe,
Were't not that, by great preservation,
We live to tell it you, the subtle traitor
This day had plotted, in the council-house
To murder me and my good Lord of Gloucester?

Lord Mayor:
What, had he so?

GLOUCESTER:
What, think You we are Turks or infidels?
Or that we would, against the form of law,
Proceed thus rashly to the villain's death,
But that the extreme peril of the case,
The peace of England and our persons' safety,
Enforced us to this execution?

Lord Mayor:
Now, fair befall you! he deserved his death;
And you my good lords, both have well proceeded,
To warn false traitors from the like attempts.
I never look'd for better at his hands,
After he once fell in with Mistress Shore.

GLOUCESTER:
Yet had not we determined he should die,
Until your lordship came to see his death;
Which now the loving haste of these our friends,
Somewhat against our meaning, have prevented:
Because, my lord, we would have had you heard
The traitor speak, and timorously confess
The manner and the purpose of his treason;
That you might well have signified the same
Unto the citizens, who haply may
Misconstrue us in him and wail his death.

Lord Mayor:
But, my good lord, your grace's word shall serve,
As well as I had seen and heard him speak
And doubt you not, right noble princes both,
But I'll acquaint our duteous citizens
With all your just proceedings in this cause.

GLOUCESTER:
And to that end we wish'd your lord-ship here,
To avoid the carping censures of the world.

BUCKINGHAM:
But since you come too late of our intents,
Yet witness what you hear we did intend:
And so, my good lord mayor, we bid farewell.

GLOUCESTER:
Go, after, after, cousin Buckingham.
The mayor towards Guildhall hies him in all post:
There, at your meet'st advantage of the time,
Infer the bastardy of Edward's children:
Tell them how Edward put to death a citizen,
Only for saying he would make his son
Heir to the crown; meaning indeed his house,
Which, by the sign thereof was termed so.
Moreover, urge his hateful luxury
And bestial appetite in change of lust;
Which stretched to their servants, daughters, wives,
Even where his lustful eye or savage heart,
Without control, listed to make his prey.
Nay, for a need, thus far come near my person:
Tell them, when that my mother went with child
Of that unsatiate Edward, noble York
My princely father then had wars in France
And, by just computation of the time,
Found that the issue was not his begot;
Which well appeared in his lineaments,
Being nothing like the noble duke my father:
But touch this sparingly, as 'twere far off,
Because you know, my lord, my mother lives.

BUCKINGHAM:
Fear not, my lord, I'll play the orator
As if the golden fee for which I plead
Were for myself: and so, my lord, adieu.

GLOUCESTER:
If you thrive well, bring them to Baynard's Castle;
Where you shall find me well accompanied
With reverend fathers and well-learned bishops.

BUCKINGHAM:
I go: and towards three or four o'clock
Look for the news that the Guildhall affords.

GLOUCESTER:
Go, Lovel, with all speed to Doctor Shaw;
Go thou to Friar Penker; bid them both
Meet me within this hour at Baynard's Castle.
Now will I in, to take some privy order,
To draw the brats of Clarence out of sight;
And to give notice, that no manner of person
At any time have recourse unto the princes.

Scrivener:
This is the indictment of the good Lord Hastings;
Which in a set hand fairly is engross'd,
That it may be this day read over in Paul's.
And mark how well the sequel hangs together:
Eleven hours I spent to write it over,
For yesternight by Catesby was it brought me;
The precedent was full as long a-doing:
And yet within these five hours lived Lord Hastings,
Untainted, unexamined, free, at liberty
Here's a good world the while! Why who's so gross,
That seeth not this palpable device?
Yet who's so blind, but says he sees it not?
Bad is the world; and all will come to nought,
When such bad dealings must be seen in thought.

GLOUCESTER:
How now, my lord, what say the citizens?

BUCKINGHAM:
Now, by the holy mother of our Lord,
The citizens are mum and speak not a word.

GLOUCESTER:
Touch'd you the bastardy of Edward's children?

BUCKINGHAM:
I did; with his contract with Lady Lucy,
And his contract by deputy in France;
The insatiate greediness of his desires,
And his enforcement of the city wives;
His tyranny for trifles; his own bastardy,
As being got, your father then in France,
His resemblance, being not like the duke;
Withal I did infer your lineaments,
Being the right idea of your father,
Both in your form and nobleness of mind;
Laid open all your victories in Scotland,
Your dicipline in war, wisdom in peace,
Your bounty, virtue, fair humility:
Indeed, left nothing fitting for the purpose
Untouch'd, or slightly handled, in discourse
And when mine oratory grew to an end
I bid them that did love their country's good
Cry 'God save Richard, England's royal king!'

GLOUCESTER:
Ah! and did they so?

BUCKINGHAM:
No, so God help me, they spake not a word;
But, like dumb statues or breathing stones,
Gazed each on other, and look'd deadly pale.
Which when I saw, I reprehended them;
And ask'd the mayor what meant this wilful silence:
His answer was, the people were not wont
To be spoke to but by the recorder.
Then he was urged to tell my tale again,
'Thus saith the duke, thus hath the duke inferr'd;'
But nothing spake in warrant from himself.
When he had done, some followers of mine own,
At the lower end of the hall, hurl'd up their caps,
And some ten voices cried 'God save King Richard!'
And thus I took the vantage of those few,
'Thanks, gentle citizens and friends,' quoth I;
'This general applause and loving shout
Argues your wisdoms and your love to Richard:'
And even here brake off, and came away.

GLOUCESTER:
What tongueless blocks were they! would not they speak?

BUCKINGHAM:
No, by my troth, my lord.

GLOUCESTER:
Will not the mayor then and his brethren come?

BUCKINGHAM:
The mayor is here at hand: intend some fear;
Be not you spoke with, but by mighty suit:
And look you get a prayer-book in your hand,
And stand betwixt two churchmen, good my lord;
For on that ground I'll build a holy descant:
And be not easily won to our request:
Play the maid's part, still answer nay, and take it.

GLOUCESTER:
I go; and if you plead as well for them
As I can say nay to thee for myself,
No doubt well bring it to a happy issue.

BUCKINGHAM:
Go, go, up to the leads; the lord mayor knocks.
Welcome my lord; I dance attendance here;
I think the duke will not be spoke withal.
Here comes his servant: how now, Catesby,
What says he?

CATESBY:
My lord: he doth entreat your grace;
To visit him to-morrow or next day:
He is within, with two right reverend fathers,
Divinely bent to meditation;
And no worldly suit would he be moved,
To draw him from his holy exercise.

BUCKINGHAM:
Return, good Catesby, to thy lord again;
Tell him, myself, the mayor and citizens,
In deep designs and matters of great moment,
No less importing than our general good,
Are come to have some conference with his grace.

CATESBY:
I'll tell him what you say, my lord.

BUCKINGHAM:
Ah, ha, my lord, this prince is not an Edward!
He is not lolling on a lewd day-bed,
But on his knees at meditation;
Not dallying with a brace of courtezans,
But meditating with two deep divines;
Not sleeping, to engross his idle body,
But praying, to enrich his watchful soul:
Happy were England, would this gracious prince
Take on himself the sovereignty thereof:
But, sure, I fear, we shall ne'er win him to it.

Lord Mayor:
Marry, God forbid his grace should say us nay!

BUCKINGHAM:
I fear he will.
How now, Catesby, what says your lord?

CATESBY:
My lord,
He wonders to what end you have assembled
Such troops of citizens to speak with him,
His grace not being warn'd thereof before:
My lord, he fears you mean no good to him.

BUCKINGHAM:
Sorry I am my noble cousin should
Suspect me, that I mean no good to him:
By heaven, I come in perfect love to him;
And so once more return and tell his grace.
When holy and devout religious men
Are at their beads, 'tis hard to draw them thence,
So sweet is zealous contemplation.

Lord Mayor:
See, where he stands between two clergymen!

BUCKINGHAM:
Two props of virtue for a Christian prince,
To stay him from the fall of vanity:
And, see, a book of prayer in his hand,
True ornaments to know a holy man.
Famous Plantagenet, most gracious prince,
Lend favourable ears to our request;
And pardon us the interruption
Of thy devotion and right Christian zeal.

GLOUCESTER:
My lord, there needs no such apology:
I rather do beseech you pardon me,
Who, earnest in the service of my God,
Neglect the visitation of my friends.
But, leaving this, what is your grace's pleasure?

BUCKINGHAM:
Even that, I hope, which pleaseth God above,
And all good men of this ungovern'd isle.

GLOUCESTER:
I do suspect I have done some offence
That seems disgracious in the city's eyes,
And that you come to reprehend my ignorance.

BUCKINGHAM:
You have, my lord: would it might please your grace,
At our entreaties, to amend that fault!

GLOUCESTER:
Else wherefore breathe I in a Christian land?

BUCKINGHAM:
Then know, it is your fault that you resign
The supreme seat, the throne majestical,
The scepter'd office of your ancestors,
Your state of fortune and your due of birth,
The lineal glory of your royal house,
To the corruption of a blemished stock:
Whilst, in the mildness of your sleepy thoughts,
Which here we waken to our country's good,
This noble isle doth want her proper limbs;
Her face defaced with scars of infamy,
Her royal stock graft with ignoble plants,
And almost shoulder'd in the swallowing gulf
Of blind forgetfulness and dark oblivion.
Which to recure, we heartily solicit
Your gracious self to take on you the charge
And kingly government of this your land,
Not as protector, steward, substitute,
Or lowly factor for another's gain;
But as successively from blood to blood,
Your right of birth, your empery, your own.
For this, consorted with the citizens,
Your very worshipful and loving friends,
And by their vehement instigation,
In this just suit come I to move your grace.

GLOUCESTER:
I know not whether to depart in silence,
Or bitterly to speak in your reproof.
Best fitteth my degree or your condition
If not to answer, you might haply think
Tongue-tied ambition, not replying, yielded
To bear the golden yoke of sovereignty,
Which fondly you would here impose on me;
If to reprove you for this suit of yours,
So season'd with your faithful love to me.
Then, on the other side, I cheque'd my friends.
Therefore, to speak, and to avoid the first,
And then, in speaking, not to incur the last,
Definitively thus I answer you.
Your love deserves my thanks; but my desert
Unmeritable shuns your high request.
First if all obstacles were cut away,
And that my path were even to the crown,
As my ripe revenue and due by birth
Yet so much is my poverty of spirit,
So mighty and so many my defects,
As I had rather hide me from my greatness,
Being a bark to brook no mighty sea,
Than in my greatness covet to be hid,
And in the vapour of my glory smother'd.
But, God be thank'd, there's no need of me,
And much I need to help you, if need were;
The royal tree hath left us royal fruit,
Which, mellow'd by the stealing hours of time,
Will well become the seat of majesty,
And make, no doubt, us happy by his reign.
On him I lay what you would lay on me,
The right and fortune of his happy stars;
Which God defend that I should wring from him!

BUCKINGHAM:
My lord, this argues conscience in your grace;
But the respects thereof are nice and trivial,
All circumstances well considered.
You say that Edward is your brother's son:
So say we too, but not by Edward's wife;
For first he was contract to Lady Lucy--
Your mother lives a witness to that vow--
And afterward by substitute betroth'd
To Bona, sister to the King of France.
These both put by a poor petitioner,
A care-crazed mother of a many children,
A beauty-waning and distressed widow,
Even in the afternoon of her best days,
Made prize and purchase of his lustful eye,
Seduced the pitch and height of all his thoughts
To base declension and loathed bigamy
By her, in his unlawful bed, he got
This Edward, whom our manners term the prince.
More bitterly could I expostulate,
Save that, for reverence to some alive,
I give a sparing limit to my tongue.
Then, good my lord, take to your royal self
This proffer'd benefit of dignity;
If non to bless us and the land withal,
Yet to draw forth your noble ancestry
From the corruption of abusing times,
Unto a lineal true-derived course.

Lord Mayor:
Do, good my lord, your citizens entreat you.

BUCKINGHAM:
Refuse not, mighty lord, this proffer'd love.

CATESBY:
O, make them joyful, grant their lawful suit!

GLOUCESTER:
Alas, why would you heap these cares on me?
I am unfit for state and majesty;
I do beseech you, take it not amiss;
I cannot nor I will not yield to you.

BUCKINGHAM:
If you refuse it,--as, in love and zeal,
Loath to depose the child, Your brother's son;
As well we know your tenderness of heart
And gentle, kind, effeminate remorse,
Which we have noted in you to your kin,
And egally indeed to all estates,--
Yet whether you accept our suit or no,
Your brother's son shall never reign our king;
But we will plant some other in the throne,
To the disgrace and downfall of your house:
And in this resolution here we leave you.--
Come, citizens: 'zounds! I'll entreat no more.

GLOUCESTER:
O, do not swear, my lord of Buckingham.

CATESBY:
Call them again, my lord, and accept their suit.

ANOTHER:
Do, good my lord, lest all the land do rue it.

GLOUCESTER:
Would you enforce me to a world of care?
Well, call them again. I am not made of stone,
But penetrable to your. kind entreats,
Albeit against my conscience and my soul.
Cousin of Buckingham, and you sage, grave men,
Since you will buckle fortune on my back,
To bear her burthen, whether I will or no,
I must have patience to endure the load:
But if black scandal or foul-faced reproach
Attend the sequel of your imposition,
Your mere enforcement shall acquittance me
From all the impure blots and stains thereof;
For God he knows, and you may partly see,
How far I am from the desire thereof.

Lord Mayor:
God bless your grace! we see it, and will say it.

GLOUCESTER:
In saying so, you shall but say the truth.

BUCKINGHAM:
Then I salute you with this kingly title:
Long live Richard, England's royal king!

Lord Mayor:
Amen.

BUCKINGHAM:
To-morrow will it please you to be crown'd?

GLOUCESTER:
Even when you please, since you will have it so.

BUCKINGHAM:
To-morrow, then, we will attend your grace:
And so most joyfully we take our leave.

GLOUCESTER:
Come, let us to our holy task again.
Farewell, good cousin; farewell, gentle friends.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Who meets us here?  my niece Plantagenet
Led in the hand of her kind aunt of Gloucester?
Now, for my life, she's wandering to the Tower,
On pure heart's love to greet the tender princes.
Daughter, well met.

LADY ANNE:
God give your graces both
A happy and a joyful time of day!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
As much to you, good sister! Whither away?

LADY ANNE:
No farther than the Tower; and, as I guess,
Upon the like devotion as yourselves,
To gratulate the gentle princes there.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Kind sister, thanks: we'll enter all together.
And, in good time, here the lieutenant comes.
Master lieutenant, pray you, by your leave,
How doth the prince, and my young son of York?

BRAKENBURY:
Right well, dear madam. By your patience,
I may not suffer you to visit them;
The king hath straitly charged the contrary.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
The king! why, who's that?

BRAKENBURY:
I cry you mercy: I mean the lord protector.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
The Lord protect him from that kingly title!
Hath he set bounds betwixt their love and me?
I am their mother; who should keep me from them?

DUCHESS OF YORK:
I am their fathers mother; I will see them.

LADY ANNE:
Their aunt I am in law, in love their mother:
Then bring me to their sights; I'll bear thy blame
And take thy office from thee, on my peril.

BRAKENBURY:
No, madam, no; I may not leave it so:
I am bound by oath, and therefore pardon me.

LORD STANLEY:
Let me but meet you, ladies, one hour hence,
And I'll salute your grace of York as mother,
And reverend looker on, of two fair queens.
Come, madam, you must straight to Westminster,
There to be crowned Richard's royal queen.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
O, cut my lace in sunder, that my pent heart
May have some scope to beat, or else I swoon
With this dead-killing news!

LADY ANNE:
Despiteful tidings! O unpleasing news!

DORSET:
Be of good cheer: mother, how fares your grace?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
O Dorset, speak not to me, get thee hence!
Death and destruction dog thee at the heels;
Thy mother's name is ominous to children.
If thou wilt outstrip death, go cross the seas,
And live with Richmond, from the reach of hell
Go, hie thee, hie thee from this slaughter-house,
Lest thou increase the number of the dead;
And make me die the thrall of Margaret's curse,
Nor mother, wife, nor England's counted queen.

LORD STANLEY:
Full of wise care is this your counsel, madam.
Take all the swift advantage of the hours;
You shall have letters from me to my son
To meet you on the way, and welcome you.
Be not ta'en tardy by unwise delay.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
O ill-dispersing wind of misery!
O my accursed womb, the bed of death!
A cockatrice hast thou hatch'd to the world,
Whose unavoided eye is murderous.

LORD STANLEY:
Come, madam, come; I in all haste was sent.

LADY ANNE:
And I in all unwillingness will go.
I would to God that the inclusive verge
Of golden metal that must round my brow
Were red-hot steel, to sear me to the brain!
Anointed let me be with deadly venom,
And die, ere men can say, God save the queen!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Go, go, poor soul, I envy not thy glory
To feed my humour, wish thyself no harm.

LADY ANNE:
No! why?  When he that is my husband now
Came to me, as I follow'd Henry's corse,
When scarce the blood was well wash'd from his hands
Which issued from my other angel husband
And that dead saint which then I weeping follow'd;
O, when, I say, I look'd on Richard's face,
This was my wish: 'Be thou,' quoth I, ' accursed,
For making me, so young, so old a widow!
And, when thou wed'st, let sorrow haunt thy bed;
And be thy wife--if any be so mad--
As miserable by the life of thee
As thou hast made me by my dear lord's death!
Lo, ere I can repeat this curse again,
Even in so short a space, my woman's heart
Grossly grew captive to his honey words
And proved the subject of my own soul's curse,
Which ever since hath kept my eyes from rest;
For never yet one hour in his bed
Have I enjoy'd the golden dew of sleep,
But have been waked by his timorous dreams.
Besides, he hates me for my father Warwick;
And will, no doubt, shortly be rid of me.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Poor heart, adieu! I pity thy complaining.

LADY ANNE:
No more than from my soul I mourn for yours.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Farewell, thou woful welcomer of glory!

LADY ANNE:
Adieu, poor soul, that takest thy leave of it!

DUCHESS OF YORK:

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Stay, yet look back with me unto the Tower.
Pity, you ancient stones, those tender babes
Whom envy hath immured within your walls!
Rough cradle for such little pretty ones!
Rude ragged nurse, old sullen playfellow
For tender princes, use my babies well!
So foolish sorrow bids your stones farewell.

KING RICHARD III:
Stand all apart Cousin of Buckingham!

BUCKINGHAM:
My gracious sovereign?

KING RICHARD III:
Give me thy hand.
Thus high, by thy advice
And thy assistance, is King Richard seated;
But shall we wear these honours for a day?
Or shall they last, and we rejoice in them?

BUCKINGHAM:
Still live they and for ever may they last!

KING RICHARD III:
O Buckingham, now do I play the touch,
To try if thou be current gold indeed
Young Edward lives: think now what I would say.

BUCKINGHAM:
Say on, my loving lord.

KING RICHARD III:
Why, Buckingham, I say, I would be king,

BUCKINGHAM:
Why, so you are, my thrice renowned liege.

KING RICHARD III:
Ha! am I king? 'tis so: but Edward lives.

BUCKINGHAM:
True, noble prince.

KING RICHARD III:
O bitter consequence,
That Edward still should live! 'True, noble prince!'
Cousin, thou wert not wont to be so dull:
Shall I be plain? I wish the bastards dead;
And I would have it suddenly perform'd.
What sayest thou? speak suddenly; be brief.

BUCKINGHAM:
Your grace may do your pleasure.

KING RICHARD III:
Tut, tut, thou art all ice, thy kindness freezeth:
Say, have I thy consent that they shall die?

BUCKINGHAM:
Give me some breath, some little pause, my lord
Before I positively herein:
I will resolve your grace immediately.

CATESBY:

KING RICHARD III:
I will converse with iron-witted fools
And unrespective boys: none are for me
That look into me with considerate eyes:
High-reaching Buckingham grows circumspect.
Boy!

Page:
My lord?

KING RICHARD III:
Know'st thou not any whom corrupting gold
Would tempt unto a close exploit of death?

Page:
My lord, I know a discontented gentleman,
Whose humble means match not his haughty mind:
Gold were as good as twenty orators,
And will, no doubt, tempt him to any thing.

KING RICHARD III:
What is his name?

Page:
His name, my lord, is Tyrrel.

KING RICHARD III:
I partly know the man: go, call him hither.
The deep-revolving witty Buckingham
No more shall be the neighbour to my counsel:
Hath he so long held out with me untired,
And stops he now for breath?
How now! what news with you?

STANLEY:
My lord, I hear the Marquis Dorset's fled
To Richmond, in those parts beyond the sea
Where he abides.

KING RICHARD III:
Catesby!

CATESBY:
My lord?

KING RICHARD III:
Rumour it abroad
That Anne, my wife, is sick and like to die:
I will take order for her keeping close.
Inquire me out some mean-born gentleman,
Whom I will marry straight to Clarence' daughter:
The boy is foolish, and I fear not him.
Look, how thou dream'st! I say again, give out
That Anne my wife is sick and like to die:
About it; for it stands me much upon,
To stop all hopes whose growth may damage me.
I must be married to my brother's daughter,
Or else my kingdom stands on brittle glass.
Murder her brothers, and then marry her!
Uncertain way of gain! But I am in
So far in blood that sin will pluck on sin:
Tear-falling pity dwells not in this eye.
Is thy name Tyrrel?

TYRREL:
James Tyrrel, and your most obedient subject.

KING RICHARD III:
Art thou, indeed?

TYRREL:
Prove me, my gracious sovereign.

KING RICHARD III:
Darest thou resolve to kill a friend of mine?

TYRREL:
Ay, my lord;
But I had rather kill two enemies.

KING RICHARD III:
Why, there thou hast it: two deep enemies,
Foes to my rest and my sweet sleep's disturbers
Are they that I would have thee deal upon:
Tyrrel, I mean those bastards in the Tower.

TYRREL:
Let me have open means to come to them,


--- End of file: shakespear_05.txt ---

And soon I'll rid you from the fear of them.

KING RICHARD III:
Thou sing'st sweet music. Hark, come hither, Tyrrel
Go, by this token: rise, and lend thine ear:
There is no more but so: say it is done,
And I will love thee, and prefer thee too.

TYRREL:
'Tis done, my gracious lord.

KING RICHARD III:
Shall we hear from thee, Tyrrel, ere we sleep?

TYRREL:
Ye shall, my Lord.

BUCKINGHAM:
My Lord, I have consider'd in my mind
The late demand that you did sound me in.

KING RICHARD III:
Well, let that pass. Dorset is fled to Richmond.

BUCKINGHAM:
I hear that news, my lord.

KING RICHARD III:
Stanley, he is your wife's son well, look to it.

BUCKINGHAM:
My lord, I claim your gift, my due by promise,
For which your honour and your faith is pawn'd;
The earldom of Hereford and the moveables
The which you promised I should possess.

KING RICHARD III:
Stanley, look to your wife; if she convey
Letters to Richmond, you shall answer it.

BUCKINGHAM:
What says your highness to my just demand?

KING RICHARD III:
As I remember, Henry the Sixth
Did prophesy that Richmond should be king,
When Richmond was a little peevish boy.
A king, perhaps, perhaps,--

BUCKINGHAM:
My lord!

KING RICHARD III:
How chance the prophet could not at that time
Have told me, I being by, that I should kill him?

BUCKINGHAM:
My lord, your promise for the earldom,--

KING RICHARD III:
Richmond! When last I was at Exeter,
The mayor in courtesy show'd me the castle,
And call'd it Rougemont: at which name I started,
Because a bard of Ireland told me once
I should not live long after I saw Richmond.

BUCKINGHAM:
My Lord!

KING RICHARD III:
Ay, what's o'clock?

BUCKINGHAM:
I am thus bold to put your grace in mind
Of what you promised me.

KING RICHARD III:
Well, but what's o'clock?

BUCKINGHAM:
Upon the stroke of ten.

KING RICHARD III:
Well, let it strike.

BUCKINGHAM:
Why let it strike?

KING RICHARD III:
Because that, like a Jack, thou keep'st the stroke
Betwixt thy begging and my meditation.
I am not in the giving vein to-day.

BUCKINGHAM:
Why, then resolve me whether you will or no.

KING RICHARD III:
Tut, tut,
Thou troublest me; am not in the vein.

BUCKINGHAM:
Is it even so? rewards he my true service
With such deep contempt made I him king for this?
O, let me think on Hastings, and be gone
To Brecknock, while my fearful head is on!

TYRREL:
The tyrannous and bloody deed is done.
The most arch of piteous massacre
That ever yet this land was guilty of.
Dighton and Forrest, whom I did suborn
To do this ruthless piece of butchery,
Although they were flesh'd villains, bloody dogs,
Melting with tenderness and kind compassion
Wept like two children in their deaths' sad stories.
'Lo, thus' quoth Dighton, 'lay those tender babes:'
'Thus, thus,' quoth Forrest, 'girdling one another
Within their innocent alabaster arms:
Their lips were four red roses on a stalk,
Which in their summer beauty kiss'd each other.
A book of prayers on their pillow lay;
Which once,' quoth Forrest, 'almost changed my mind;
But O! the devil'--there the villain stopp'd
Whilst Dighton thus told on: 'We smothered
The most replenished sweet work of nature,
That from the prime creation e'er she framed.'
Thus both are gone with conscience and remorse;
They could not speak; and so I left them both,
To bring this tidings to the bloody king.
And here he comes.
All hail, my sovereign liege!

KING RICHARD III:
Kind Tyrrel, am I happy in thy news?

TYRREL:
If to have done the thing you gave in charge
Beget your happiness, be happy then,
For it is done, my lord.

KING RICHARD III:
But didst thou see them dead?

TYRREL:
I did, my lord.

KING RICHARD III:
And buried, gentle Tyrrel?

TYRREL:
The chaplain of the Tower hath buried them;
But how or in what place I do not know.

KING RICHARD III:
Come to me, Tyrrel, soon at after supper,
And thou shalt tell the process of their death.
Meantime, but think how I may do thee good,
And be inheritor of thy desire.
Farewell till soon.
The son of Clarence have I pent up close;
His daughter meanly have I match'd in marriage;
The sons of Edward sleep in Abraham's bosom,
And Anne my wife hath bid the world good night.
Now, for I know the Breton Richmond aims
At young Elizabeth, my brother's daughter,
And, by that knot, looks proudly o'er the crown,
To her I go, a jolly thriving wooer.

CATESBY:
My lord!

KING RICHARD III:
Good news or bad, that thou comest in so bluntly?

CATESBY:
Bad news, my lord: Ely is fled to Richmond;
And Buckingham, back'd with the hardy Welshmen,
Is in the field, and still his power increaseth.

KING RICHARD III:
Ely with Richmond troubles me more near
Than Buckingham and his rash-levied army.
Come, I have heard that fearful commenting
Is leaden servitor to dull delay;
Delay leads impotent and snail-paced beggary
Then fiery expedition be my wing,
Jove's Mercury, and herald for a king!
Come, muster men: my counsel is my shield;
We must be brief when traitors brave the field.

QUEEN MARGARET:
So, now prosperity begins to mellow
And drop into the rotten mouth of death.
Here in these confines slily have I lurk'd,
To watch the waning of mine adversaries.
A dire induction am I witness to,
And will to France, hoping the consequence
Will prove as bitter, black, and tragical.
Withdraw thee, wretched Margaret: who comes here?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Ah, my young princes! ah, my tender babes!
My unblown flowers, new-appearing sweets!
If yet your gentle souls fly in the air
And be not fix'd in doom perpetual,
Hover about me with your airy wings
And hear your mother's lamentation!

QUEEN MARGARET:
Hover about her; say, that right for right
Hath dimm'd your infant morn to aged night.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
So many miseries have crazed my voice,
That my woe-wearied tongue is mute and dumb,
Edward Plantagenet, why art thou dead?

QUEEN MARGARET:
Plantagenet doth quit Plantagenet.
Edward for Edward pays a dying debt.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Wilt thou, O God, fly from such gentle lambs,
And throw them in the entrails of the wolf?
When didst thou sleep when such a deed was done?

QUEEN MARGARET:
When holy Harry died, and my sweet son.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Blind sight, dead life, poor mortal living ghost,
Woe's scene, world's shame, grave's due by life usurp'd,
Brief abstract and record of tedious days,
Rest thy unrest on England's lawful earth,
Unlawfully made drunk with innocents' blood!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
O, that thou wouldst as well afford a grave
As thou canst yield a melancholy seat!
Then would I hide my bones, not rest them here.
O, who hath any cause to mourn but I?

QUEEN MARGARET:
If ancient sorrow be most reverend,
Give mine the benefit of seniory,
And let my woes frown on the upper hand.
If sorrow can admit society,
Tell o'er your woes again by viewing mine:
I had an Edward, till a Richard kill'd him;
I had a Harry, till a Richard kill'd him:
Thou hadst an Edward, till a Richard kill'd him;
Thou hadst a Richard, till a Richard killed him;

DUCHESS OF YORK:
I had a Richard too, and thou didst kill him;
I had a Rutland too, thou holp'st to kill him.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Thou hadst a Clarence too, and Richard kill'd him.
From forth the kennel of thy womb hath crept
A hell-hound that doth hunt us all to death:
That dog, that had his teeth before his eyes,
To worry lambs and lap their gentle blood,
That foul defacer of God's handiwork,
That excellent grand tyrant of the earth,
That reigns in galled eyes of weeping souls,
Thy womb let loose, to chase us to our graves.
O upright, just, and true-disposing God,
How do I thank thee, that this carnal cur
Preys on the issue of his mother's body,
And makes her pew-fellow with others' moan!

DUCHESS OF YORK:
O Harry's wife, triumph not in my woes!
God witness with me, I have wept for thine.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Bear with me; I am hungry for revenge,
And now I cloy me with beholding it.
Thy Edward he is dead, that stabb'd my Edward:
Thy other Edward dead, to quit my Edward;
Young York he is but boot, because both they
Match not the high perfection of my loss:
Thy Clarence he is dead that kill'd my Edward;
And the beholders of this tragic play,
The adulterate Hastings, Rivers, Vaughan, Grey,
Untimely smother'd in their dusky graves.
Richard yet lives, hell's black intelligencer,
Only reserved their factor, to buy souls
And send them thither: but at hand, at hand,
Ensues his piteous and unpitied end:
Earth gapes, hell burns, fiends roar, saints pray.
To have him suddenly convey'd away.
Cancel his bond of life, dear God, I prey,
That I may live to say, The dog is dead!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
O, thou didst prophesy the time would come
That I should wish for thee to help me curse
That bottled spider, that foul bunch-back'd toad!

QUEEN MARGARET:
I call'd thee then vain flourish of my fortune;
I call'd thee then poor shadow, painted queen;
The presentation of but what I was;
The flattering index of a direful pageant;
One heaved a-high, to be hurl'd down below;
A mother only mock'd with two sweet babes;
A dream of what thou wert, a breath, a bubble,
A sign of dignity, a garish flag,
To be the aim of every dangerous shot,
A queen in jest, only to fill the scene.
Where is thy husband now? where be thy brothers?
Where are thy children? wherein dost thou, joy?
Who sues to thee and cries 'God save the queen'?
Where be the bending peers that flatter'd thee?
Where be the thronging troops that follow'd thee?
Decline all this, and see what now thou art:
For happy wife, a most distressed widow;
For joyful mother, one that wails the name;
For queen, a very caitiff crown'd with care;
For one being sued to, one that humbly sues;
For one that scorn'd at me, now scorn'd of me;
For one being fear'd of all, now fearing one;
For one commanding all, obey'd of none.
Thus hath the course of justice wheel'd about,
And left thee but a very prey to time;
Having no more but thought of what thou wert,
To torture thee the more, being what thou art.
Thou didst usurp my place, and dost thou not
Usurp the just proportion of my sorrow?
Now thy proud neck bears half my burthen'd yoke;
From which even here I slip my weary neck,
And leave the burthen of it all on thee.
Farewell, York's wife, and queen of sad mischance:
These English woes will make me smile in France.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
O thou well skill'd in curses, stay awhile,
And teach me how to curse mine enemies!

QUEEN MARGARET:
Forbear to sleep the nights, and fast the days;
Compare dead happiness with living woe;
Think that thy babes were fairer than they were,
And he that slew them fouler than he is:
Bettering thy loss makes the bad causer worse:
Revolving this will teach thee how to curse.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
My words are dull; O, quicken them with thine!

QUEEN MARGARET:
Thy woes will make them sharp, and pierce like mine.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Why should calamity be full of words?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Windy attorneys to their client woes,
Airy succeeders of intestate joys,
Poor breathing orators of miseries!
Let them have scope: though what they do impart
Help not all, yet do they ease the heart.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
If so, then be not tongue-tied: go with me.
And in the breath of bitter words let's smother
My damned son, which thy two sweet sons smother'd.
I hear his drum: be copious in exclaims.

KING RICHARD III:
Who intercepts my expedition?

DUCHESS OF YORK:
O, she that might have intercepted thee,
By strangling thee in her accursed womb
From all the slaughters, wretch, that thou hast done!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Hidest thou that forehead with a golden crown,
Where should be graven, if that right were right,
The slaughter of the prince that owed that crown,
And the dire death of my two sons and brothers?
Tell me, thou villain slave, where are my children?

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Thou toad, thou toad, where is thy brother Clarence?
And little Ned Plantagenet, his son?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Where is kind Hastings, Rivers, Vaughan, Grey?

KING RICHARD III:
A flourish, trumpets! strike alarum, drums!
Let not the heavens hear these tell-tale women
Rail on the Lord's enointed: strike, I say!
Either be patient, and entreat me fair,
Or with the clamorous report of war
Thus will I drown your exclamations.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Art thou my son?

KING RICHARD III:
Ay, I thank God, my father, and yourself.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Then patiently hear my impatience.

KING RICHARD III:
Madam, I have a touch of your condition,
Which cannot brook the accent of reproof.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
O, let me speak!

KING RICHARD III:
Do then: but I'll not hear.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
I will be mild and gentle in my speech.

KING RICHARD III:
And brief, good mother; for I am in haste.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Art thou so hasty? I have stay'd for thee,
God knows, in anguish, pain and agony.

KING RICHARD III:
And came I not at last to comfort you?

DUCHESS OF YORK:
No, by the holy rood, thou know'st it well,
Thou camest on earth to make the earth my hell.
A grievous burthen was thy birth to me;
Tetchy and wayward was thy infancy;
Thy school-days frightful, desperate, wild, and furious,
Thy prime of manhood daring, bold, and venturous,
Thy age confirm'd, proud, subdued, bloody,
treacherous,
More mild, but yet more harmful, kind in hatred:
What comfortable hour canst thou name,
That ever graced me in thy company?

KING RICHARD III:
Faith, none, but Humphrey Hour, that call'd
your grace
To breakfast once forth of my company.
If I be so disgracious in your sight,
Let me march on, and not offend your grace.
Strike the drum.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
I prithee, hear me speak.

KING RICHARD III:
You speak too bitterly.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Hear me a word;
For I shall never speak to thee again.

KING RICHARD III:
So.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Either thou wilt die, by God's just ordinance,
Ere from this war thou turn a conqueror,
Or I with grief and extreme age shall perish
And never look upon thy face again.
Therefore take with thee my most heavy curse;
Which, in the day of battle, tire thee more
Than all the complete armour that thou wear'st!
My prayers on the adverse party fight;
And there the little souls of Edward's children
Whisper the spirits of thine enemies
And promise them success and victory.
Bloody thou art, bloody will be thy end;
Shame serves thy life and doth thy death attend.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Though far more cause, yet much less spirit to curse
Abides in me; I say amen to all.

KING RICHARD III:
Stay, madam; I must speak a word with you.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
I have no more sons of the royal blood
For thee to murder: for my daughters, Richard,
They shall be praying nuns, not weeping queens;
And therefore level not to hit their lives.

KING RICHARD III:
You have a daughter call'd Elizabeth,
Virtuous and fair, royal and gracious.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
And must she die for this? O, let her live,
And I'll corrupt her manners, stain her beauty;
Slander myself as false to Edward's bed;
Throw over her the veil of infamy:
So she may live unscarr'd of bleeding slaughter,
I will confess she was not Edward's daughter.

KING RICHARD III:
Wrong not her birth, she is of royal blood.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
To save her life, I'll say she is not so.

KING RICHARD III:
Her life is only safest in her birth.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
And only in that safety died her brothers.

KING RICHARD III:
Lo, at their births good stars were opposite.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
No, to their lives bad friends were contrary.

KING RICHARD III:
All unavoided is the doom of destiny.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
True, when avoided grace makes destiny:
My babes were destined to a fairer death,
If grace had bless'd thee with a fairer life.

KING RICHARD III:
You speak as if that I had slain my cousins.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Cousins, indeed; and by their uncle cozen'd
Of comfort, kingdom, kindred, freedom, life.
Whose hand soever lanced their tender hearts,
Thy head, all indirectly, gave direction:
No doubt the murderous knife was dull and blunt
Till it was whetted on thy stone-hard heart,
To revel in the entrails of my lambs.
But that still use of grief makes wild grief tame,
My tongue should to thy ears not name my boys
Till that my nails were anchor'd in thine eyes;
And I, in such a desperate bay of death,
Like a poor bark, of sails and tackling reft,
Rush all to pieces on thy rocky bosom.

KING RICHARD III:
Madam, so thrive I in my enterprise
And dangerous success of bloody wars,
As I intend more good to you and yours,
Than ever you or yours were by me wrong'd!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
What good is cover'd with the face of heaven,
To be discover'd, that can do me good?

KING RICHARD III:
The advancement of your children, gentle lady.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Up to some scaffold, there to lose their heads?

KING RICHARD III:
No, to the dignity and height of honour
The high imperial type of this earth's glory.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Flatter my sorrows with report of it;
Tell me what state, what dignity, what honour,
Canst thou demise to any child of mine?

KING RICHARD III:
Even all I have; yea, and myself and all,
Will I withal endow a child of thine;
So in the Lethe of thy angry soul
Thou drown the sad remembrance of those wrongs
Which thou supposest I have done to thee.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Be brief, lest that be process of thy kindness
Last longer telling than thy kindness' date.

KING RICHARD III:
Then know, that from my soul I love thy daughter.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
My daughter's mother thinks it with her soul.

KING RICHARD III:
What do you think?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
That thou dost love my daughter from thy soul:
So from thy soul's love didst thou love her brothers;
And from my heart's love I do thank thee for it.

KING RICHARD III:
Be not so hasty to confound my meaning:
I mean, that with my soul I love thy daughter,
And mean to make her queen of England.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Say then, who dost thou mean shall be her king?

KING RICHARD III:
Even he that makes her queen who should be else?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
What, thou?

KING RICHARD III:
I, even I: what think you of it, madam?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
How canst thou woo her?

KING RICHARD III:
That would I learn of you,
As one that are best acquainted with her humour.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
And wilt thou learn of me?

KING RICHARD III:
Madam, with all my heart.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Send to her, by the man that slew her brothers,
A pair of bleeding-hearts; thereon engrave
Edward and York; then haply she will weep:
Therefore present to her--as sometime Margaret
Did to thy father, steep'd in Rutland's blood,--
A handkerchief; which, say to her, did drain
The purple sap from her sweet brother's body
And bid her dry her weeping eyes therewith.
If this inducement force her not to love,
Send her a story of thy noble acts;
Tell her thou madest away her uncle Clarence,
Her uncle Rivers; yea, and, for her sake,
Madest quick conveyance with her good aunt Anne.

KING RICHARD III:
Come, come, you mock me; this is not the way
To win our daughter.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
There is no other way
Unless thou couldst put on some other shape,
And not be Richard that hath done all this.

KING RICHARD III:
Say that I did all this for love of her.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Nay, then indeed she cannot choose but hate thee,
Having bought love with such a bloody spoil.

KING RICHARD III:
Look, what is done cannot be now amended:
Men shall deal unadvisedly sometimes,
Which after hours give leisure to repent.
If I did take the kingdom from your sons,
To make amends, Ill give it to your daughter.
If I have kill'd the issue of your womb,
To quicken your increase, I will beget
Mine issue of your blood upon your daughter
A grandam's name is little less in love
Than is the doting title of a mother;
They are as children but one step below,
Even of your mettle, of your very blood;
Of an one pain, save for a night of groans
Endured of her, for whom you bid like sorrow.
Your children were vexation to your youth,
But mine shall be a comfort to your age.
The loss you have is but a son being king,
And by that loss your daughter is made queen.
I cannot make you what amends I would,
Therefore accept such kindness as I can.
Dorset your son, that with a fearful soul
Leads discontented steps in foreign soil,
This fair alliance quickly shall call home
To high promotions and great dignity:
The king, that calls your beauteous daughter wife.
Familiarly shall call thy Dorset brother;
Again shall you be mother to a king,
And all the ruins of distressful times
Repair'd with double riches of content.
What! we have many goodly days to see:
The liquid drops of tears that you have shed
Shall come again, transform'd to orient pearl,
Advantaging their loan with interest
Of ten times double gain of happiness.
Go, then my mother, to thy daughter go
Make bold her bashful years with your experience;
Prepare her ears to hear a wooer's tale
Put in her tender heart the aspiring flame
Of golden sovereignty; acquaint the princess
With the sweet silent hours of marriage joys
And when this arm of mine hath chastised
The petty rebel, dull-brain'd Buckingham,
Bound with triumphant garlands will I come
And lead thy daughter to a conqueror's bed;
To whom I will retail my conquest won,
And she shall be sole victress, Caesar's Caesar.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
What were I best to say? her father's brother
Would be her lord? or shall I say, her uncle?
Or, he that slew her brothers and her uncles?
Under what title shall I woo for thee,
That God, the law, my honour and her love,
Can make seem pleasing to her tender years?

KING RICHARD III:
Infer fair England's peace by this alliance.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Which she shall purchase with still lasting war.

KING RICHARD III:
Say that the king, which may command, entreats.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
That at her hands which the king's King forbids.

KING RICHARD III:
Say, she shall be a high and mighty queen.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
To wail the tide, as her mother doth.

KING RICHARD III:
Say, I will love her everlastingly.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
But how long shall that title 'ever' last?

KING RICHARD III:
Sweetly in force unto her fair life's end.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
But how long fairly shall her sweet lie last?

KING RICHARD III:
So long as heaven and nature lengthens it.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
So long as hell and Richard likes of it.

KING RICHARD III:
Say, I, her sovereign, am her subject love.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
But she, your subject, loathes such sovereignty.

KING RICHARD III:
Be eloquent in my behalf to her.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
An honest tale speeds best being plainly told.

KING RICHARD III:
Then in plain terms tell her my loving tale.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Plain and not honest is too harsh a style.

KING RICHARD III:
Your reasons are too shallow and too quick.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
O no, my reasons are too deep and dead;
Too deep and dead, poor infants, in their grave.

KING RICHARD III:
Harp not on that string, madam; that is past.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Harp on it still shall I till heart-strings break.

KING RICHARD III:
Now, by my George, my garter, and my crown,--

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Profaned, dishonour'd, and the third usurp'd.

KING RICHARD III:
I swear--

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
By nothing; for this is no oath:
The George, profaned, hath lost his holy honour;
The garter, blemish'd, pawn'd his knightly virtue;
The crown, usurp'd, disgraced his kingly glory.
if something thou wilt swear to be believed,
Swear then by something that thou hast not wrong'd.

KING RICHARD III:
Now, by the world--

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
'Tis full of thy foul wrongs.

KING RICHARD III:
My father's death--

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Thy life hath that dishonour'd.

KING RICHARD III:
Then, by myself--

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Thyself thyself misusest.

KING RICHARD III:
Why then, by God--

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
God's wrong is most of all.
If thou hadst fear'd to break an oath by Him,
The unity the king thy brother made
Had not been broken, nor my brother slain:
If thou hadst fear'd to break an oath by Him,
The imperial metal, circling now thy brow,
Had graced the tender temples of my child,
And both the princes had been breathing here,
Which now, two tender playfellows to dust,
Thy broken faith hath made a prey for worms.
What canst thou swear by now?

KING RICHARD III:
The time to come.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
That thou hast wronged in the time o'erpast;
For I myself have many tears to wash
Hereafter time, for time past wrong'd by thee.
The children live, whose parents thou hast
slaughter'd,
Ungovern'd youth, to wail it in their age;
The parents live, whose children thou hast butcher'd,
Old wither'd plants, to wail it with their age.
Swear not by time to come; for that thou hast
Misused ere used, by time misused o'erpast.

KING RICHARD III:
As I intend to prosper and repent,
So thrive I in my dangerous attempt
Of hostile arms! myself myself confound!
Heaven and fortune bar me happy hours!
Day, yield me not thy light; nor, night, thy rest!
Be opposite all planets of good luck
To my proceedings, if, with pure heart's love,
Immaculate devotion, holy thoughts,
I tender not thy beauteous princely daughter!
In her consists my happiness and thine;
Without her, follows to this land and me,
To thee, herself, and many a Christian soul,
Death, desolation, ruin and decay:
It cannot be avoided but by this;
It will not be avoided but by this.
Therefore, good mother,--I must can you so--
Be the attorney of my love to her:
Plead what I will be, not what I have been;
Not my deserts, but what I will deserve:
Urge the necessity and state of times,
And be not peevish-fond in great designs.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Shall I be tempted of the devil thus?

KING RICHARD III:
Ay, if the devil tempt thee to do good.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Shall I forget myself to be myself?

KING RICHARD III:
Ay, if yourself's remembrance wrong yourself.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
But thou didst kill my children.

KING RICHARD III:
But in your daughter's womb I bury them:
Where in that nest of spicery they shall breed
Selves of themselves, to your recomforture.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Shall I go win my daughter to thy will?

KING RICHARD III:
And be a happy mother by the deed.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
I go. Write to me very shortly.
And you shall understand from me her mind.

KING RICHARD III:
Bear her my true love's kiss; and so, farewell.
Relenting fool, and shallow, changing woman!
How now! what news?

RATCLIFF:
My gracious sovereign, on the western coast
Rideth a puissant navy; to the shore
Throng many doubtful hollow-hearted friends,
Unarm'd, and unresolved to beat them back:
'Tis thought that Richmond is their admiral;
And there they hull, expecting but the aid
Of Buckingham to welcome them ashore.

KING RICHARD III:
Some light-foot friend post to the Duke of Norfolk:
Ratcliff, thyself, or Catesby; where is he?

CATESBY:
Here, my lord.

KING RICHARD III:
Fly to the duke:
Post thou to Salisbury
When thou comest thither--
Dull, unmindful villain,
Why stand'st thou still, and go'st not to the duke?

CATESBY:
First, mighty sovereign, let me know your mind,
What from your grace I shall deliver to him.

KING RICHARD III:
O, true, good Catesby: bid him levy straight
The greatest strength and power he can make,
And meet me presently at Salisbury.

CATESBY:
I go.

RATCLIFF:
What is't your highness' pleasure I shall do at
Salisbury?

KING RICHARD III:
Why, what wouldst thou do there before I go?

RATCLIFF:
Your highness told me I should post before.

KING RICHARD III:
My mind is changed, sir, my mind is changed.
How now, what news with you?

STANLEY:
None good, my lord, to please you with the hearing;
Nor none so bad, but it may well be told.

KING RICHARD III:
Hoyday, a riddle! neither good nor bad!
Why dost thou run so many mile about,
When thou mayst tell thy tale a nearer way?
Once more, what news?

STANLEY:
Richmond is on the seas.

KING RICHARD III:
There let him sink, and be the seas on him!
White-liver'd runagate, what doth he there?

STANLEY:
I know not, mighty sovereign, but by guess.

KING RICHARD III:
Well, sir, as you guess, as you guess?

STANLEY:
Stirr'd up by Dorset, Buckingham, and Ely,
He makes for England, there to claim the crown.

KING RICHARD III:
Is the chair empty? is the sword unsway'd?
Is the king dead? the empire unpossess'd?
What heir of York is there alive but we?
And who is England's king but great York's heir?
Then, tell me, what doth he upon the sea?

STANLEY:
Unless for that, my liege, I cannot guess.

KING RICHARD III:
Unless for that he comes to be your liege,
You cannot guess wherefore the Welshman comes.
Thou wilt revolt, and fly to him, I fear.

STANLEY:
No, mighty liege; therefore mistrust me not.

KING RICHARD III:
Where is thy power, then, to beat him back?
Where are thy tenants and thy followers?
Are they not now upon the western shore.
Safe-conducting the rebels from their ships!

STANLEY:
No, my good lord, my friends are in the north.

KING RICHARD III:
Cold friends to Richard: what do they in the north,
When they should serve their sovereign in the west?

STANLEY:
They have not been commanded, mighty sovereign:
Please it your majesty to give me leave,
I'll muster up my friends, and meet your grace
Where and what time your majesty shall please.

KING RICHARD III:
Ay, ay. thou wouldst be gone to join with Richmond:
I will not trust you, sir.

STANLEY:
Most mighty sovereign,
You have no cause to hold my friendship doubtful:
I never was nor never will be false.

KING RICHARD III:
Well,
Go muster men; but, hear you, leave behind
Your son, George Stanley: look your faith be firm.
Or else his head's assurance is but frail.

STANLEY:
So deal with him as I prove true to you.

Messenger:
My gracious sovereign, now in Devonshire,
As I by friends am well advertised,
Sir Edward Courtney, and the haughty prelate
Bishop of Exeter, his brother there,
With many more confederates, are in arms.

Second Messenger:
My liege, in Kent the Guildfords are in arms;
And every hour more competitors
Flock to their aid, and still their power increaseth.

Third Messenger:
My lord, the army of the Duke of Buckingham--

KING RICHARD III:
Out on you, owls! nothing but songs of death?
Take that, until thou bring me better news.

Third Messenger:
The news I have to tell your majesty
Is, that by sudden floods and fall of waters,
Buckingham's army is dispersed and scatter'd;
And he himself wander'd away alone,
No man knows whither.

KING RICHARD III:
I cry thee mercy:
There is my purse to cure that blow of thine.
Hath any well-advised friend proclaim'd
Reward to him that brings the traitor in?

Third Messenger:
Such proclamation hath been made, my liege.

Fourth Messenger:
Sir Thomas Lovel and Lord Marquis Dorset,
'Tis said, my liege, in Yorkshire are in arms.
Yet this good comfort bring I to your grace,
The Breton navy is dispersed by tempest:
Richmond, in Yorkshire, sent out a boat
Unto the shore, to ask those on the banks
If they were his assistants, yea or no;
Who answer'd him, they came from Buckingham.
Upon his party: he, mistrusting them,
Hoisted sail and made away for Brittany.

KING RICHARD III:
March on, march on, since we are up in arms;
If not to fight with foreign enemies,
Yet to beat down these rebels here at home.

CATESBY:
My liege, the Duke of Buckingham is taken;
That is the best news: that the Earl of Richmond
Is with a mighty power landed at Milford,
Is colder tidings, yet they must be told.

KING RICHARD III:
Away towards Salisbury! while we reason here,
A royal battle might be won and lost
Some one take order Buckingham be brought
To Salisbury; the rest march on with me.

DERBY:
Sir Christopher, tell Richmond this from me:
That in the sty of this most bloody boar
My son George Stanley is frank'd up in hold:
If I revolt, off goes young George's head;
The fear of that withholds my present aid.
But, tell me, where is princely Richmond now?

CHRISTOPHER:
At Pembroke, or at Harford-west, in Wales.

DERBY:
What men of name resort to him?

CHRISTOPHER:
Sir Walter Herbert, a renowned soldier;
Sir Gilbert Talbot, Sir William Stanley;
Oxford, redoubted Pembroke, Sir James Blunt,
And Rice ap Thomas with a valiant crew;
And many more of noble fame and worth:
And towards London they do bend their course,
If by the way they be not fought withal.

DERBY:
Return unto thy lord; commend me to him:
Tell him the queen hath heartily consented
He shall espouse Elizabeth her daughter.
These letters will resolve him of my mind. Farewell.

BUCKINGHAM:
Will not King Richard let me speak with him?

Sheriff:
No, my good lord; therefore be patient.

BUCKINGHAM:
Hastings, and Edward's children, Rivers, Grey,
Holy King Henry, and thy fair son Edward,
Vaughan, and all that have miscarried
By underhand corrupted foul injustice,
If that your moody discontented souls
Do through the clouds behold this present hour,
Even for revenge mock my destruction!
This is All-Souls' day, fellows, is it not?

Sheriff:
It is, my lord.

BUCKINGHAM:
Why, then All-Souls' day is my body's doomsday.
This is the day that, in King Edward's time,
I wish't might fall on me, when I was found
False to his children or his wife's allies
This is the day wherein I wish'd to fall
By the false faith of him I trusted most;
This, this All-Souls' day to my fearful soul
Is the determined respite of my wrongs:
That high All-Seer that I dallied with
Hath turn'd my feigned prayer on my head
And given in earnest what I begg'd in jest.
Thus doth he force the swords of wicked men
To turn their own points on their masters' bosoms:
Now Margaret's curse is fallen upon my head;
'When he,' quoth she, 'shall split thy heart with sorrow,
Remember Margaret was a prophetess.'
Come, sirs, convey me to the block of shame;
Wrong hath but wrong, and blame the due of blame.

RICHMOND:
Fellows in arms, and my most loving friends,
Bruised underneath the yoke of tyranny,
Thus far into the bowels of the land
Have we march'd on without impediment;
And here receive we from our father Stanley
Lines of fair comfort and encouragement.
The wretched, bloody, and usurping boar,
That spoil'd your summer fields and fruitful vines,
Swills your warm blood like wash, and makes his trough
In your embowell'd bosoms, this foul swine
Lies now even in the centre of this isle,
Near to the town of Leicester, as we learn
From Tamworth thither is but one day's march.
In God's name, cheerly on, courageous friends,
To reap the harvest of perpetual peace
By this one bloody trial of sharp war.

OXFORD:
Every man's conscience is a thousand swords,
To fight against that bloody homicide.

HERBERT:
I doubt not but his friends will fly to us.

BLUNT:
He hath no friends but who are friends for fear.
Which in his greatest need will shrink from him.

RICHMOND:
All for our vantage. Then, in God's name, march:
True hope is swift, and flies with swallow's wings:
Kings it makes gods, and meaner creatures kings.

KING RICHARD III:
Here pitch our tents, even here in Bosworth field.
My Lord of Surrey, why look you so sad?

SURREY:
My heart is ten times lighter than my looks.

KING RICHARD III:
My Lord of Norfolk,--

NORFOLK:
Here, most gracious liege.

KING RICHARD III:
Norfolk, we must have knocks; ha! must we not?

NORFOLK:
We must both give and take, my gracious lord.

KING RICHARD III:
Up with my tent there! here will I lie tonight;
But where to-morrow?  Well, all's one for that.
Who hath descried the number of the foe?

NORFOLK:
Six or seven thousand is their utmost power.

KING RICHARD III:
Why, our battalion trebles that account:
Besides, the king's name is a tower of strength,
Which they upon the adverse party want.
Up with my tent there! Valiant gentlemen,
Let us survey the vantage of the field
Call for some men of sound direction
Let's want no discipline, make no delay,
For, lords, to-morrow is a busy day.

RICHMOND:
The weary sun hath made a golden set,
And by the bright track of his fiery car,
Gives signal, of a goodly day to-morrow.
Sir William Brandon, you shall bear my standard.
Give me some ink and paper in my tent
I'll draw the form and model of our battle,
Limit each leader to his several charge,
And part in just proportion our small strength.
My Lord of Oxford, you, Sir William Brandon,
And you, Sir Walter Herbert, stay with me.
The Earl of Pembroke keeps his regiment:
Good Captain Blunt, bear my good night to him
And by the second hour in the morning
Desire the earl to see me in my tent:
Yet one thing more, good Blunt, before thou go'st,
Where is Lord Stanley quarter'd, dost thou know?

BLUNT:
Unless I have mista'en his colours much,
Which well I am assured I have not done,
His regiment lies half a mile at least
South from the mighty power of the king.

RICHMOND:
If without peril it be possible,
Good Captain Blunt, bear my good-night to him,
And give him from me this most needful scroll.

BLUNT:
Upon my life, my lord, I'll under-take it;
And so, God give you quiet rest to-night!

RICHMOND:
Good night, good Captain Blunt. Come gentlemen,
Let us consult upon to-morrow's business
In to our tent; the air is raw and cold.

KING RICHARD III:
What is't o'clock?

CATESBY:
It's supper-time, my lord;
It's nine o'clock.

KING RICHARD III:
I will not sup to-night.
Give me some ink and paper.
What, is my beaver easier than it was?
And all my armour laid into my tent?

CATESBY:
If is, my liege; and all things are in readiness.

KING RICHARD III:
Good Norfolk, hie thee to thy charge;
Use careful watch, choose trusty sentinels.

NORFOLK:
I go, my lord.

KING RICHARD III:
Stir with the lark to-morrow, gentle Norfolk.

NORFOLK:
I warrant you, my lord.

KING RICHARD III:
Catesby!

CATESBY:
My lord?

KING RICHARD III:
Send out a pursuivant at arms
To Stanley's regiment; bid him bring his power
Before sunrising, lest his son George fall
Into the blind cave of eternal night.
Fill me a bowl of wine. Give me a watch.
Saddle white Surrey for the field to-morrow.
Look that my staves be sound, and not too heavy.
Ratcliff!

RATCLIFF:
My lord?

KING RICHARD III:
Saw'st thou the melancholy Lord Northumberland?

RATCLIFF:
Thomas the Earl of Surrey, and himself,
Much about cock-shut time, from troop to troop
Went through the army, cheering up the soldiers.

KING RICHARD III:
So, I am satisfied. Give me a bowl of wine:
I have not that alacrity of spirit,
Nor cheer of mind, that I was wont to have.
Set it down. Is ink and paper ready?

RATCLIFF:
It is, my lord.

KING RICHARD III:
Bid my guard watch; leave me.
Ratcliff, about the mid of night come to my tent
And help to arm me. Leave me, I say.

DERBY:
Fortune and victory sit on thy helm!

RICHMOND:
All comfort that the dark night can afford
Be to thy person, noble father-in-law!
Tell me, how fares our loving mother?

DERBY:
I, by attorney, bless thee from thy mother
Who prays continually for Richmond's good:
So much for that. The silent hours steal on,
And flaky darkness breaks within the east.
In brief,--for so the season bids us be,--
Prepare thy battle early in the morning,
And put thy fortune to the arbitrement
Of bloody strokes and mortal-staring war.
I, as I may--that which I would I cannot,--
With best advantage will deceive the time,
And aid thee in this doubtful shock of arms:
But on thy side I may not be too forward
Lest, being seen, thy brother, tender George,
Be executed in his father's sight.
Farewell: the leisure and the fearful time
Cuts off the ceremonious vows of love
And ample interchange of sweet discourse,
Which so long sunder'd friends should dwell upon:
God give us leisure for these rites of love!
Once more, adieu: be valiant, and speed well!

RICHMOND:
Good lords, conduct him to his regiment:
I'll strive, with troubled thoughts, to take a nap,
Lest leaden slumber peise me down to-morrow,
When I should mount with wings of victory:
Once more, good night, kind lords and gentlemen.
O Thou, whose captain I account myself,
Look on my forces with a gracious eye;
Put in their hands thy bruising irons of wrath,
That they may crush down with a heavy fall
The usurping helmets of our adversaries!
Make us thy ministers of chastisement,
That we may praise thee in the victory!
To thee I do commend my watchful soul,
Ere I let fall the windows of mine eyes:
Sleeping and waking, O, defend me still!

Ghost of Prince Edward:

Ghost of King Henry VI:

Ghost of CLARENCE:

Ghost of RIVERS:

Ghost of GREY:

Ghost of VAUGHAN:

All:

Ghost of HASTINGS:

Ghosts of young Princes:

Ghost of LADY ANNE:

Ghost of BUCKINGHAM:

KING RICHARD III:
Give me another horse: bind up my wounds.
Have mercy, Jesu!--Soft! I did but dream.
O coward conscience, how dost thou afflict me!
The lights burn blue. It is now dead midnight.
Cold fearful drops stand on my trembling flesh.
What do I fear?  myself?  there's none else by:
Richard loves Richard; that is, I am I.
Is there a murderer here?  No. Yes, I am:
Then fly. What, from myself?   Great reason why:
Lest I revenge. What, myself upon myself?
Alack. I love myself. Wherefore?  for any good
That I myself have done unto myself?
O, no! alas, I rather hate myself
For hateful deeds committed by myself!
I am a villain: yet I lie. I am not.
Fool, of thyself speak well: fool, do not flatter.
My conscience hath a thousand several tongues,
And every tongue brings in a several tale,
And every tale condemns me for a villain.
Perjury, perjury, in the high'st degree
Murder, stem murder, in the direst degree;
All several sins, all used in each degree,
Throng to the bar, crying all, Guilty! guilty!
I shall despair. There is no creature loves me;
And if I die, no soul shall pity me:
Nay, wherefore should they, since that I myself
Find in myself no pity to myself?
Methought the souls of all that I had murder'd
Came to my tent; and every one did threat
To-morrow's vengeance on the head of Richard.

RATCLIFF:
My lord!

KING RICHARD III:
'Zounds! who is there?

RATCLIFF:
Ratcliff, my lord; 'tis I. The early village-cock
Hath twice done salutation to the morn;
Your friends are up, and buckle on their armour.

KING RICHARD III:
O Ratcliff, I have dream'd a fearful dream!
What thinkest thou, will our friends prove all true?

RATCLIFF:
No doubt, my lord.

KING RICHARD III:
O Ratcliff, I fear, I fear,--

RATCLIFF:
Nay, good my lord, be not afraid of shadows.

KING RICHARD III:
By the apostle Paul, shadows to-night
Have struck more terror to the soul of Richard
Than can the substance of ten thousand soldiers
Armed in proof, and led by shallow Richmond.
It is not yet near day. Come, go with me;
Under our tents I'll play the eaves-dropper,
To see if any mean to shrink from me.

LORDS:
Good morrow, Richmond!

RICHMOND:
Cry mercy, lords and watchful gentlemen,
That you have ta'en a tardy sluggard here.

LORDS:
How have you slept, my lord?

RICHMOND:
The sweetest sleep, and fairest-boding dreams
That ever enter'd in a drowsy head,
Have I since your departure had, my lords.
Methought their souls, whose bodies Richard murder'd,
Came to my tent, and cried on victory:
I promise you, my soul is very jocund
In the remembrance of so fair a dream.
How far into the morning is it, lords?

LORDS:
Upon the stroke of four.

RICHMOND:
Why, then 'tis time to arm and give direction.
More than I have said, loving countrymen,
The leisure and enforcement of the time
Forbids to dwell upon: yet remember this,
God and our good cause fight upon our side;
The prayers of holy saints and wronged souls,
Like high-rear'd bulwarks, stand before our faces;
Richard except, those whom we fight against
Had rather have us win than him they follow:
For what is he they follow?  truly, gentlemen,
A bloody tyrant and a homicide;
One raised in blood, and one in blood establish'd;
One that made means to come by what he hath,
And slaughter'd those that were the means to help him;
Abase foul stone, made precious by the foil
Of England's chair, where he is falsely set;
One that hath ever been God's enemy:
Then, if you fight against God's enemy,
God will in justice ward you as his soldiers;
If you do sweat to put a tyrant down,
You sleep in peace, the tyrant being slain;
If you do fight against your country's foes,
Your country's fat shall pay your pains the hire;
If you do fight in safeguard of your wives,
Your wives shall welcome home the conquerors;
If you do free your children from the sword,
Your children's children quit it in your age.
Then, in the name of God and all these rights,
Advance your standards, draw your willing swords.
For me, the ransom of my bold attempt
Shall be this cold corpse on the earth's cold face;
But if I thrive, the gain of my attempt
The least of you shall share his part thereof.
Sound drums and trumpets boldly and cheerfully;
God and Saint George! Richmond and victory!

KING RICHARD III:
What said Northumberland as touching Richmond?

RATCLIFF:
That he was never trained up in arms.

KING RICHARD III:
He said the truth: and what said Surrey then?

RATCLIFF:
He smiled and said 'The better for our purpose.'

KING RICHARD III:
He was in the right; and so indeed it is.
Ten the clock there. Give me a calendar.
Who saw the sun to-day?

RATCLIFF:
Not I, my lord.

KING RICHARD III:
Then he disdains to shine; for by the book
He should have braved the east an hour ago
A black day will it be to somebody. Ratcliff!

RATCLIFF:
My lord?

KING RICHARD III:
The sun will not be seen to-day;
The sky doth frown and lour upon our army.
I would these dewy tears were from the ground.
Not shine to-day! Why, what is that to me
More than to Richmond?  for the selfsame heaven
That frowns on me looks sadly upon him.

NORFOLK:
Arm, arm, my lord; the foe vaunts in the field.

KING RICHARD III:
Come, bustle, bustle; caparison my horse.
Call up Lord Stanley, bid him bring his power:
I will lead forth my soldiers to the plain,
And thus my battle shall be ordered:
My foreward shall be drawn out all in length,
Consisting equally of horse and foot;
Our archers shall be placed in the midst
John Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Earl of Surrey,
Shall have the leading of this foot and horse.
They thus directed, we will follow
In the main battle, whose puissance on either side
Shall be well winged with our chiefest horse.
This, and Saint George to boot! What think'st thou, Norfolk?

NORFOLK:
A good direction, warlike sovereign.
This found I on my tent this morning.

KING RICHARD III:

Messenger:
My lord, he doth deny to come.

KING RICHARD III:
Off with his son George's head!

NORFOLK:
My lord, the enemy is past the marsh
After the battle let George Stanley die.

KING RICHARD III:
A thousand hearts are great within my bosom:
Advance our standards, set upon our foes
Our ancient word of courage, fair Saint George,
Inspire us with the spleen of fiery dragons!
Upon them! victory sits on our helms.

CATESBY:
Rescue, my Lord of Norfolk, rescue, rescue!
The king enacts more wonders than a man,
Daring an opposite to every danger:
His horse is slain, and all on foot he fights,
Seeking for Richmond in the throat of death.
Rescue, fair lord, or else the day is lost!

KING RICHARD III:
A horse! a horse! my kingdom for a horse!

CATESBY:
Withdraw, my lord; I'll help you to a horse.

KING RICHARD III:
Slave, I have set my life upon a cast,
And I will stand the hazard of the die:
I think there be six Richmonds in the field;
Five have I slain to-day instead of him.
A horse! a horse! my kingdom for a horse!

RICHMOND:
God and your arms be praised, victorious friends,
The day is ours, the bloody dog is dead.

DERBY:
Courageous Richmond, well hast thou acquit thee.
Lo, here, this long-usurped royalty
From the dead temples of this bloody wretch
Have I pluck'd off, to grace thy brows withal:
Wear it, enjoy it, and make much of it.

RICHMOND:
Great God of heaven, say Amen to all!
But, tell me, is young George Stanley living?

DERBY:
He is, my lord, and safe in Leicester town;
Whither, if it please you, we may now withdraw us.

RICHMOND:
What men of name are slain on either side?

DERBY:
John Duke of Norfolk, Walter Lord Ferrers,
Sir Robert Brakenbury, and Sir William Brandon.

RICHMOND:
Inter their bodies as becomes their births:
Proclaim a pardon to the soldiers fled
That in submission will return to us:
And then, as we have ta'en the sacrament,
We will unite the white rose and the red:
Smile heaven upon this fair conjunction,
That long have frown'd upon their enmity!
What traitor hears me, and says not amen?
England hath long been mad, and scarr'd herself;
The brother blindly shed the brother's blood,
The father rashly slaughter'd his own son,
The son, compell'd, been butcher to the sire:
All this divided York and Lancaster,
Divided in their dire division,
O, now, let Richmond and Elizabeth,
The true succeeders of each royal house,
By God's fair ordinance conjoin together!
And let their heirs, God, if thy will be so.
Enrich the time to come with smooth-faced peace,
With smiling plenty and fair prosperous days!
Abate the edge of traitors, gracious Lord,
That would reduce these bloody days again,
And make poor England weep in streams of blood!
Let them not live to taste this land's increase
That would with treason wound this fair land's peace!
Now civil wounds are stopp'd, peace lives again:
That she may long live here, God say amen!

KING RICHARD II:
Old John of Gaunt, time-honour'd Lancaster,
Hast thou, according to thy oath and band,
Brought hither Henry Hereford thy bold son,
Here to make good the boisterous late appeal,
Which then our leisure would not let us hear,
Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?

JOHN OF GAUNT:
I have, my liege.

KING RICHARD II:
Tell me, moreover, hast thou sounded him,
If he appeal the duke on ancient malice;
Or worthily, as a good subject should,
On some known ground of treachery in him?

JOHN OF GAUNT:
As near as I could sift him on that argument,
On some apparent danger seen in him
Aim'd at your highness, no inveterate malice.

KING RICHARD II:
Then call them to our presence; face to face,
And frowning brow to brow, ourselves will hear
The accuser and the accused freely speak:
High-stomach'd are they both, and full of ire,
In rage deaf as the sea, hasty as fire.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Many years of happy days befal
My gracious sovereign, my most loving liege!

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
Each day still better other's happiness;
Until the heavens, envying earth's good hap,
Add an immortal title to your crown!

KING RICHARD II:
We thank you both: yet one but flatters us,
As well appeareth by the cause you come;
Namely to appeal each other of high treason.
Cousin of Hereford, what dost thou object
Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
First, heaven be the record to my speech!
In the devotion of a subject's love,
Tendering the precious safety of my prince,
And free from other misbegotten hate,
Come I appellant to this princely presence.
Now, Thomas Mowbray, do I turn to thee,
And mark my greeting well; for what I speak
My body shall make good upon this earth,
Or my divine soul answer it in heaven.
Thou art a traitor and a miscreant,
Too good to be so and too bad to live,
Since the more fair and crystal is the sky,
The uglier seem the clouds that in it fly.
Once more, the more to aggravate the note,
With a foul traitor's name stuff I thy throat;
And wish, so please my sovereign, ere I move,
What my tongue speaks my right drawn sword may prove.

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
Let not my cold words here accuse my zeal:
'Tis not the trial of a woman's war,
The bitter clamour of two eager tongues,
Can arbitrate this cause betwixt us twain;
The blood is hot that must be cool'd for this:
Yet can I not of such tame patience boast
As to be hush'd and nought at all to say:
First, the fair reverence of your highness curbs me
From giving reins and spurs to my free speech;
Which else would post until it had return'd
These terms of treason doubled down his throat.
Setting aside his high blood's royalty,
And let him be no kinsman to my liege,
I do defy him, and I spit at him;
Call him a slanderous coward and a villain:
Which to maintain I would allow him odds,
And meet him, were I tied to run afoot
Even to the frozen ridges of the Alps,
Or any other ground inhabitable,
Where ever Englishman durst set his foot.
Mean time let this defend my loyalty,
By all my hopes, most falsely doth he lie.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Pale trembling coward, there I throw my gage,
Disclaiming here the kindred of the king,
And lay aside my high blood's royalty,
Which fear, not reverence, makes thee to except.
If guilty dread have left thee so much strength
As to take up mine honour's pawn, then stoop:
By that and all the rites of knighthood else,
Will I make good against thee, arm to arm,
What I have spoke, or thou canst worse devise.

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
I take it up; and by that sword I swear
Which gently laid my knighthood on my shoulder,
I'll answer thee in any fair degree,
Or chivalrous design of knightly trial:
And when I mount, alive may I not light,
If I be traitor or unjustly fight!

KING RICHARD II:
What doth our cousin lay to Mowbray's charge?
It must be great that can inherit us
So much as of a thought of ill in him.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Look, what I speak, my life shall prove it true;
That Mowbray hath received eight thousand nobles
In name of lendings for your highness' soldiers,
The which he hath detain'd for lewd employments,
Like a false traitor and injurious villain.
Besides I say and will in battle prove,
Or here or elsewhere to the furthest verge
That ever was survey'd by English eye,
That all the treasons for these eighteen years
Complotted and contrived in this land
Fetch from false Mowbray their first head and spring.
Further I say and further will maintain
Upon his bad life to make all this good,
That he did plot the Duke of Gloucester's death,
Suggest his soon-believing adversaries,
And consequently, like a traitor coward,
Sluiced out his innocent soul through streams of blood:
Which blood, like sacrificing Abel's, cries,
Even from the tongueless caverns of the earth,
To me for justice and rough chastisement;
And, by the glorious worth of my descent,
This arm shall do it, or this life be spent.

KING RICHARD II:
How high a pitch his resolution soars!
Thomas of Norfolk, what say'st thou to this?

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
O, let my sovereign turn away his face
And bid his ears a little while be deaf,
Till I have told this slander of his blood,
How God and good men hate so foul a liar.

KING RICHARD II:
Mowbray, impartial are our eyes and ears:
Were he my brother, nay, my kingdom's heir,
As he is but my father's brother's son,
Now, by my sceptre's awe, I make a vow,
Such neighbour nearness to our sacred blood
Should nothing privilege him, nor partialize
The unstooping firmness of my upright soul:
He is our subject, Mowbray; so art thou:
Free speech and fearless I to thee allow.

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
Then, Bolingbroke, as low as to thy heart,
Through the false passage of thy throat, thou liest.
Three parts of that receipt I had for Calais
Disbursed I duly to his highness' soldiers;
The other part reserved I by consent,
For that my sovereign liege was in my debt
Upon remainder of a dear account,
Since last I went to France to fetch his queen:
Now swallow down that lie. For Gloucester's death,
I slew him not; but to my own disgrace
Neglected my sworn duty in that case.
For you, my noble Lord of Lancaster,
The honourable father to my foe
Once did I lay an ambush for your life,
A trespass that doth vex my grieved soul
But ere I last received the sacrament
I did confess it, and exactly begg'd
Your grace's pardon, and I hope I had it.
This is my fault: as for the rest appeall'd,
It issues from the rancour of a villain,
A recreant and most degenerate traitor
Which in myself I boldly will defend;
And interchangeably hurl down my gage
Upon this overweening traitor's foot,
To prove myself a loyal gentleman
Even in the best blood chamber'd in his bosom.
In haste whereof, most heartily I pray
Your highness to assign our trial day.

KING RICHARD II:
Wrath-kindled gentlemen, be ruled by me;
Let's purge this choler without letting blood:
This we prescribe, though no physician;
Deep malice makes too deep incision;
Forget, forgive; conclude and be agreed;
Our doctors say this is no month to bleed.
Good uncle, let this end where it begun;
We'll calm the Duke of Norfolk, you your son.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
To be a make-peace shall become my age:
Throw down, my son, the Duke of Norfolk's gage.

KING RICHARD II:
And, Norfolk, throw down his.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
When, Harry, when?
Obedience bids I should not bid again.

KING RICHARD II:
Norfolk, throw down, we bid; there is no boot.

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
Myself I throw, dread sovereign, at thy foot.
My life thou shalt command, but not my shame:
The one my duty owes; but my fair name,
Despite of death that lives upon my grave,
To dark dishonour's use thou shalt not have.
I am disgraced, impeach'd and baffled here,
Pierced to the soul with slander's venom'd spear,
The which no balm can cure but his heart-blood
Which breathed this poison.

KING RICHARD II:
Rage must be withstood:
Give me his gage: lions make leopards tame.

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
Yea, but not change his spots: take but my shame.
And I resign my gage. My dear dear lord,
The purest treasure mortal times afford
Is spotless reputation: that away,
Men are but gilded loam or painted clay.
A jewel in a ten-times-barr'd-up chest
Is a bold spirit in a loyal breast.
Mine honour is my life; both grow in one:
Take honour from me, and my life is done:
Then, dear my liege, mine honour let me try;
In that I live and for that will I die.

KING RICHARD II:
Cousin, throw up your gage; do you begin.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
O, God defend my soul from such deep sin!
Shall I seem crest-fall'n in my father's sight?
Or with pale beggar-fear impeach my height
Before this out-dared dastard? Ere my tongue
Shall wound my honour with such feeble wrong,
Or sound so base a parle, my teeth shall tear
The slavish motive of recanting fear,
And spit it bleeding in his high disgrace,
Where shame doth harbour, even in Mowbray's face.

KING RICHARD II:
We were not born to sue, but to command;
Which since we cannot do to make you friends,
Be ready, as your lives shall answer it,
At Coventry, upon Saint Lambert's day:
There shall your swords and lances arbitrate
The swelling difference of your settled hate:
Since we can not atone you, we shall see
Justice design the victor's chivalry.
Lord marshal, command our officers at arms
Be ready to direct these home alarms.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
Alas, the part I had in Woodstock's blood
Doth more solicit me than your exclaims,
To stir against the butchers of his life!
But since correction lieth in those hands
Which made the fault that we cannot correct,
Put we our quarrel to the will of heaven;
Who, when they see the hours ripe on earth,
Will rain hot vengeance on offenders' heads.

DUCHESS:
Finds brotherhood in thee no sharper spur?
Hath love in thy old blood no living fire?
Edward's seven sons, whereof thyself art one,
Were as seven vials of his sacred blood,
Or seven fair branches springing from one root:
Some of those seven are dried by nature's course,
Some of those branches by the Destinies cut;
But Thomas, my dear lord, my life, my Gloucester,
One vial full of Edward's sacred blood,
One flourishing branch of his most royal root,
Is crack'd, and all the precious liquor spilt,
Is hack'd down, and his summer leaves all faded,
By envy's hand and murder's bloody axe.
Ah, Gaunt, his blood was thine! that bed, that womb,
That metal, that self-mould, that fashion'd thee
Made him a man; and though thou livest and breathest,
Yet art thou slain in him: thou dost consent
In some large measure to thy father's death,
In that thou seest thy wretched brother die,
Who was the model of thy father's life.
Call it not patience, Gaunt; it is despair:
In suffering thus thy brother to be slaughter'd,
Thou showest the naked pathway to thy life,
Teaching stern murder how to butcher thee:
That which in mean men we intitle patience
Is pale cold cowardice in noble breasts.


--- End of file: shakespear_06.txt ---

What shall I say? to safeguard thine own life,
The best way is to venge my Gloucester's death.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
God's is the quarrel; for God's substitute,
His deputy anointed in His sight,
Hath caused his death: the which if wrongfully,
Let heaven revenge; for I may never lift
An angry arm against His minister.

DUCHESS:
Where then, alas, may I complain myself?

JOHN OF GAUNT:
To God, the widow's champion and defence.

DUCHESS:
Why, then, I will. Farewell, old Gaunt.
Thou goest to Coventry, there to behold
Our cousin Hereford and fell Mowbray fight:
O, sit my husband's wrongs on Hereford's spear,
That it may enter butcher Mowbray's breast!
Or, if misfortune miss the first career,
Be Mowbray's sins so heavy in his bosom,
They may break his foaming courser's back,
And throw the rider headlong in the lists,
A caitiff recreant to my cousin Hereford!
Farewell, old Gaunt: thy sometimes brother's wife
With her companion grief must end her life.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
Sister, farewell; I must to Coventry:
As much good stay with thee as go with me!

DUCHESS:
Yet one word more: grief boundeth where it falls,
Not with the empty hollowness, but weight:
I take my leave before I have begun,
For sorrow ends not when it seemeth done.
Commend me to thy brother, Edmund York.
Lo, this is all:--nay, yet depart not so;
Though this be all, do not so quickly go;
I shall remember more. Bid him--ah, what?--
With all good speed at Plashy visit me.
Alack, and what shall good old York there see
But empty lodgings and unfurnish'd walls,
Unpeopled offices, untrodden stones?
And what hear there for welcome but my groans?
Therefore commend me; let him not come there,
To seek out sorrow that dwells every where.
Desolate, desolate, will I hence and die:
The last leave of thee takes my weeping eye.

Lord Marshal:
My Lord Aumerle, is Harry Hereford arm'd?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Yea, at all points; and longs to enter in.

Lord Marshal:
The Duke of Norfolk, sprightfully and bold,
Stays but the summons of the appellant's trumpet.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Why, then, the champions are prepared, and stay
For nothing but his majesty's approach.

KING RICHARD II:
Marshal, demand of yonder champion
The cause of his arrival here in arms:
Ask him his name and orderly proceed
To swear him in the justice of his cause.

Lord Marshal:
In God's name and the king's, say who thou art
And why thou comest thus knightly clad in arms,
Against what man thou comest, and what thy quarrel:
Speak truly, on thy knighthood and thy oath;
As so defend thee heaven and thy valour!

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
My name is Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk;
Who hither come engaged by my oath--
Which God defend a knight should violate!--
Both to defend my loyalty and truth
To God, my king and my succeeding issue,
Against the Duke of Hereford that appeals me
And, by the grace of God and this mine arm,
To prove him, in defending of myself,
A traitor to my God, my king, and me:
And as I truly fight, defend me heaven!

KING RICHARD II:
Marshal, ask yonder knight in arms,
Both who he is and why he cometh hither
Thus plated in habiliments of war,
And formally, according to our law,
Depose him in the justice of his cause.

Lord Marshal:
What is thy name? and wherefore comest thou hither,
Before King Richard in his royal lists?
Against whom comest thou? and what's thy quarrel?
Speak like a true knight, so defend thee heaven!

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby
Am I; who ready here do stand in arms,
To prove, by God's grace and my body's valour,
In lists, on Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,
That he is a traitor, foul and dangerous,
To God of heaven, King Richard and to me;
And as I truly fight, defend me heaven!

Lord Marshal:
On pain of death, no person be so bold
Or daring-hardy as to touch the lists,
Except the marshal and such officers
Appointed to direct these fair designs.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Lord marshal, let me kiss my sovereign's hand,
And bow my knee before his majesty:
For Mowbray and myself are like two men
That vow a long and weary pilgrimage;
Then let us take a ceremonious leave
And loving farewell of our several friends.

Lord Marshal:
The appellant in all duty greets your highness,
And craves to kiss your hand and take his leave.

KING RICHARD II:
We will descend and fold him in our arms.
Cousin of Hereford, as thy cause is right,
So be thy fortune in this royal fight!
Farewell, my blood; which if to-day thou shed,
Lament we may, but not revenge thee dead.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
O let no noble eye profane a tear
For me, if I be gored with Mowbray's spear:
As confident as is the falcon's flight
Against a bird, do I with Mowbray fight.
My loving lord, I take my leave of you;
Of you, my noble cousin, Lord Aumerle;
Not sick, although I have to do with death,
But lusty, young, and cheerly drawing breath.
Lo, as at English feasts, so I regreet
The daintiest last, to make the end most sweet:
O thou, the earthly author of my blood,
Whose youthful spirit, in me regenerate,
Doth with a twofold vigour lift me up
To reach at victory above my head,
Add proof unto mine armour with thy prayers;
And with thy blessings steel my lance's point,
That it may enter Mowbray's waxen coat,
And furbish new the name of John a Gaunt,
Even in the lusty havior of his son.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
God in thy good cause make thee prosperous!
Be swift like lightning in the execution;
And let thy blows, doubly redoubled,
Fall like amazing thunder on the casque
Of thy adverse pernicious enemy:
Rouse up thy youthful blood, be valiant and live.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Mine innocency and Saint George to thrive!

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
However God or fortune cast my lot,
There lives or dies, true to King Richard's throne,
A loyal, just and upright gentleman:
Never did captive with a freer heart
Cast off his chains of bondage and embrace
His golden uncontroll'd enfranchisement,
More than my dancing soul doth celebrate
This feast of battle with mine adversary.
Most mighty liege, and my companion peers,
Take from my mouth the wish of happy years:
As gentle and as jocund as to jest
Go I to fight: truth hath a quiet breast.

KING RICHARD II:
Farewell, my lord: securely I espy
Virtue with valour couched in thine eye.
Order the trial, marshal, and begin.

Lord Marshal:
Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby,
Receive thy lance; and God defend the right!

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Strong as a tower in hope, I cry amen.

Lord Marshal:
Go bear this lance to Thomas, Duke of Norfolk.

First Herald:
Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby,
Stands here for God, his sovereign and himself,
On pain to be found false and recreant,
To prove the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray,
A traitor to his God, his king and him;
And dares him to set forward to the fight.

Second Herald:
Here standeth Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,
On pain to be found false and recreant,
Both to defend himself and to approve
Henry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby,
To God, his sovereign and to him disloyal;
Courageously and with a free desire
Attending but the signal to begin.

Lord Marshal:
Sound, trumpets; and set forward, combatants.
Stay, the king hath thrown his warder down.

KING RICHARD II:
Let them lay by their helmets and their spears,
And both return back to their chairs again:
Withdraw with us: and let the trumpets sound
While we return these dukes what we decree.
Draw near,
And list what with our council we have done.
For that our kingdom's earth should not be soil'd
With that dear blood which it hath fostered;
And for our eyes do hate the dire aspect
Of civil wounds plough'd up with neighbours' sword;
And for we think the eagle-winged pride
Of sky-aspiring and ambitious thoughts,
With rival-hating envy, set on you
To wake our peace, which in our country's cradle
Draws the sweet infant breath of gentle sleep;
Which so roused up with boisterous untuned drums,
With harsh resounding trumpets' dreadful bray,
And grating shock of wrathful iron arms,
Might from our quiet confines fright fair peace
And make us wade even in our kindred's blood,
Therefore, we banish you our territories:
You, cousin Hereford, upon pain of life,
Till twice five summers have enrich'd our fields
Shall not regreet our fair dominions,
But tread the stranger paths of banishment.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Your will be done: this must my comfort be,
Sun that warms you here shall shine on me;
And those his golden beams to you here lent
Shall point on me and gild my banishment.

KING RICHARD II:
Norfolk, for thee remains a heavier doom,
Which I with some unwillingness pronounce:
The sly slow hours shall not determinate
The dateless limit of thy dear exile;
The hopeless word of 'never to return'
Breathe I against thee, upon pain of life.

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
A heavy sentence, my most sovereign liege,
And all unlook'd for from your highness' mouth:
A dearer merit, not so deep a maim
As to be cast forth in the common air,
Have I deserved at your highness' hands.
The language I have learn'd these forty years,
My native English, now I must forego:
And now my tongue's use is to me no more
Than an unstringed viol or a harp,
Or like a cunning instrument cased up,
Or, being open, put into his hands
That knows no touch to tune the harmony:
Within my mouth you have engaol'd my tongue,
Doubly portcullis'd with my teeth and lips;
And dull unfeeling barren ignorance
Is made my gaoler to attend on me.
I am too old to fawn upon a nurse,
Too far in years to be a pupil now:
What is thy sentence then but speechless death,
Which robs my tongue from breathing native breath?

KING RICHARD II:
It boots thee not to be compassionate:
After our sentence plaining comes too late.

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
Then thus I turn me from my country's light,
To dwell in solemn shades of endless night.

KING RICHARD II:
Return again, and take an oath with thee.
Lay on our royal sword your banish'd hands;
Swear by the duty that you owe to God--
Our part therein we banish with yourselves--
To keep the oath that we administer:
You never shall, so help you truth and God!
Embrace each other's love in banishment;
Nor never look upon each other's face;
Nor never write, regreet, nor reconcile
This louring tempest of your home-bred hate;
Nor never by advised purpose meet
To plot, contrive, or complot any ill
'Gainst us, our state, our subjects, or our land.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
I swear.

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
And I, to keep all this.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Norfolk, so far as to mine enemy:--
By this time, had the king permitted us,
One of our souls had wander'd in the air.
Banish'd this frail sepulchre of our flesh,
As now our flesh is banish'd from this land:
Confess thy treasons ere thou fly the realm;
Since thou hast far to go, bear not along
The clogging burthen of a guilty soul.

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
No, Bolingbroke: if ever I were traitor,
My name be blotted from the book of life,
And I from heaven banish'd as from hence!
But what thou art, God, thou, and I do know;
And all too soon, I fear, the king shall rue.
Farewell, my liege. Now no way can I stray;
Save back to England, all the world's my way.

KING RICHARD II:
Uncle, even in the glasses of thine eyes
I see thy grieved heart: thy sad aspect
Hath from the number of his banish'd years
Pluck'd four away.
Six frozen winter spent,
Return with welcome home from banishment.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
How long a time lies in one little word!
Four lagging winters and four wanton springs
End in a word: such is the breath of kings.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
I thank my liege, that in regard of me
He shortens four years of my son's exile:
But little vantage shall I reap thereby;
For, ere the six years that he hath to spend
Can change their moons and bring their times about
My oil-dried lamp and time-bewasted light
Shall be extinct with age and endless night;
My inch of taper will be burnt and done,
And blindfold death not let me see my son.

KING RICHARD II:
Why uncle, thou hast many years to live.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
But not a minute, king, that thou canst give:
Shorten my days thou canst with sullen sorrow,
And pluck nights from me, but not lend a morrow;
Thou canst help time to furrow me with age,
But stop no wrinkle in his pilgrimage;
Thy word is current with him for my death,
But dead, thy kingdom cannot buy my breath.

KING RICHARD II:
Thy son is banish'd upon good advice,
Whereto thy tongue a party-verdict gave:
Why at our justice seem'st thou then to lour?

JOHN OF GAUNT:
Things sweet to taste prove in digestion sour.
You urged me as a judge; but I had rather
You would have bid me argue like a father.
O, had it been a stranger, not my child,
To smooth his fault I should have been more mild:
A partial slander sought I to avoid,
And in the sentence my own life destroy'd.
Alas, I look'd when some of you should say,
I was too strict to make mine own away;
But you gave leave to my unwilling tongue
Against my will to do myself this wrong.

KING RICHARD II:
Cousin, farewell; and, uncle, bid him so:
Six years we banish him, and he shall go.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Cousin, farewell: what presence must not know,
From where you do remain let paper show.

Lord Marshal:
My lord, no leave take I; for I will ride,
As far as land will let me, by your side.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
O, to what purpose dost thou hoard thy words,
That thou return'st no greeting to thy friends?

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
I have too few to take my leave of you,
When the tongue's office should be prodigal
To breathe the abundant dolour of the heart.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
Thy grief is but thy absence for a time.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Joy absent, grief is present for that time.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
What is six winters? they are quickly gone.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
To men in joy; but grief makes one hour ten.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
Call it a travel that thou takest for pleasure.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
My heart will sigh when I miscall it so,
Which finds it an inforced pilgrimage.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
The sullen passage of thy weary steps
Esteem as foil wherein thou art to set
The precious jewel of thy home return.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Nay, rather, every tedious stride I make
Will but remember me what a deal of world
I wander from the jewels that I love.
Must I not serve a long apprenticehood
To foreign passages, and in the end,
Having my freedom, boast of nothing else
But that I was a journeyman to grief?

JOHN OF GAUNT:
All places that the eye of heaven visits
Are to a wise man ports and happy havens.
Teach thy necessity to reason thus;
There is no virtue like necessity.
Think not the king did banish thee,
But thou the king. Woe doth the heavier sit,
Where it perceives it is but faintly borne.
Go, say I sent thee forth to purchase honour
And not the king exiled thee; or suppose
Devouring pestilence hangs in our air
And thou art flying to a fresher clime:
Look, what thy soul holds dear, imagine it
To lie that way thou go'st, not whence thou comest:
Suppose the singing birds musicians,
The grass whereon thou tread'st the presence strew'd,
The flowers fair ladies, and thy steps no more
Than a delightful measure or a dance;
For gnarling sorrow hath less power to bite
The man that mocks at it and sets it light.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
O, who can hold a fire in his hand
By thinking on the frosty Caucasus?
Or cloy the hungry edge of appetite
By bare imagination of a feast?
Or wallow naked in December snow
By thinking on fantastic summer's heat?
O, no! the apprehension of the good
Gives but the greater feeling to the worse:
Fell sorrow's tooth doth never rankle more
Than when he bites, but lanceth not the sore.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
Come, come, my son, I'll bring thee on thy way:
Had I thy youth and cause, I would not stay.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Then, England's ground, farewell; sweet soil, adieu;
My mother, and my nurse, that bears me yet!
Where'er I wander, boast of this I can,
Though banish'd, yet a trueborn Englishman.

KING RICHARD II:
We did observe. Cousin Aumerle,
How far brought you high Hereford on his way?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
I brought high Hereford, if you call him so,
But to the next highway, and there I left him.

KING RICHARD II:
And say, what store of parting tears were shed?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Faith, none for me; except the north-east wind,
Which then blew bitterly against our faces,
Awaked the sleeping rheum, and so by chance
Did grace our hollow parting with a tear.

KING RICHARD II:
What said our cousin when you parted with him?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
'Farewell:'
And, for my heart disdained that my tongue
Should so profane the word, that taught me craft
To counterfeit oppression of such grief
That words seem'd buried in my sorrow's grave.
Marry, would the word 'farewell' have lengthen'd hours
And added years to his short banishment,
He should have had a volume of farewells;
But since it would not, he had none of me.

KING RICHARD II:
He is our cousin, cousin; but 'tis doubt,
When time shall call him home from banishment,
Whether our kinsman come to see his friends.
Ourself and Bushy, Bagot here and Green
Observed his courtship to the common people;
How he did seem to dive into their hearts
With humble and familiar courtesy,
What reverence he did throw away on slaves,
Wooing poor craftsmen with the craft of smiles
And patient underbearing of his fortune,
As 'twere to banish their affects with him.
Off goes his bonnet to an oyster-wench;
A brace of draymen bid God speed him well
And had the tribute of his supple knee,
With 'Thanks, my countrymen, my loving friends;'
As were our England in reversion his,
And he our subjects' next degree in hope.

GREEN:
Well, he is gone; and with him go these thoughts.
Now for the rebels which stand out in Ireland,
Expedient manage must be made, my liege,
Ere further leisure yield them further means
For their advantage and your highness' loss.

KING RICHARD II:
We will ourself in person to this war:
And, for our coffers, with too great a court
And liberal largess, are grown somewhat light,
We are inforced to farm our royal realm;
The revenue whereof shall furnish us
For our affairs in hand: if that come short,
Our substitutes at home shall have blank charters;
Whereto, when they shall know what men are rich,
They shall subscribe them for large sums of gold
And send them after to supply our wants;
For we will make for Ireland presently.
Bushy, what news?

BUSHY:
Old John of Gaunt is grievous sick, my lord,
Suddenly taken; and hath sent post haste
To entreat your majesty to visit him.

KING RICHARD II:
Where lies he?

BUSHY:
At Ely House.

KING RICHARD II:
Now put it, God, in the physician's mind
To help him to his grave immediately!
The lining of his coffers shall make coats
To deck our soldiers for these Irish wars.
Come, gentlemen, let's all go visit him:
Pray God we may make haste, and come too late!

All:
Amen.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
Will the king come, that I may breathe my last
In wholesome counsel to his unstaid youth?

DUKE OF YORK:
Vex not yourself, nor strive not with your breath;
For all in vain comes counsel to his ear.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
O, but they say the tongues of dying men
Enforce attention like deep harmony:
Where words are scarce, they are seldom spent in vain,
For they breathe truth that breathe their words in pain.
He that no more must say is listen'd more
Than they whom youth and ease have taught to glose;
More are men's ends mark'd than their lives before:
The setting sun, and music at the close,
As the last taste of sweets, is sweetest last,
Writ in remembrance more than things long past:
Though Richard my life's counsel would not hear,
My death's sad tale may yet undeaf his ear.

DUKE OF YORK:
No; it is stopp'd with other flattering sounds,
As praises, of whose taste the wise are fond,
Lascivious metres, to whose venom sound
The open ear of youth doth always listen;
Report of fashions in proud Italy,
Whose manners still our tardy apish nation
Limps after in base imitation.
Where doth the world thrust forth a vanity--
So it be new, there's no respect how vile--
That is not quickly buzzed into his ears?
Then all too late comes counsel to be heard,
Where will doth mutiny with wit's regard.
Direct not him whose way himself will choose:
'Tis breath thou lack'st, and that breath wilt thou lose.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
Methinks I am a prophet new inspired
And thus expiring do foretell of him:
His rash fierce blaze of riot cannot last,
For violent fires soon burn out themselves;
Small showers last long, but sudden storms are short;
He tires betimes that spurs too fast betimes;
With eager feeding food doth choke the feeder:
Light vanity, insatiate cormorant,
Consuming means, soon preys upon itself.
This royal throne of kings, this scepter'd isle,
This earth of majesty, this seat of Mars,
This other Eden, demi-paradise,
This fortress built by Nature for herself
Against infection and the hand of war,
This happy breed of men, this little world,
This precious stone set in the silver sea,
Which serves it in the office of a wall,
Or as a moat defensive to a house,
Against the envy of less happier lands,
This blessed plot, this earth, this realm, this England,
This nurse, this teeming womb of royal kings,
Fear'd by their breed and famous by their birth,
Renowned for their deeds as far from home,
For Christian service and true chivalry,
As is the sepulchre in stubborn Jewry,
Of the world's ransom, blessed Mary's Son,
This land of such dear souls, this dear dear land,
Dear for her reputation through the world,
Is now leased out, I die pronouncing it,
Like to a tenement or pelting farm:
England, bound in with the triumphant sea
Whose rocky shore beats back the envious siege
Of watery Neptune, is now bound in with shame,
With inky blots and rotten parchment bonds:
That England, that was wont to conquer others,
Hath made a shameful conquest of itself.
Ah, would the scandal vanish with my life,
How happy then were my ensuing death!

DUKE OF YORK:
The king is come: deal mildly with his youth;
For young hot colts being raged do rage the more.

QUEEN:
How fares our noble uncle, Lancaster?

KING RICHARD II:
What comfort, man? how is't with aged Gaunt?

JOHN OF GAUNT:
O how that name befits my composition!
Old Gaunt indeed, and gaunt in being old:
Within me grief hath kept a tedious fast;
And who abstains from meat that is not gaunt?
For sleeping England long time have I watch'd;
Watching breeds leanness, leanness is all gaunt:
The pleasure that some fathers feed upon,
Is my strict fast; I mean, my children's looks;
And therein fasting, hast thou made me gaunt:
Gaunt am I for the grave, gaunt as a grave,
Whose hollow womb inherits nought but bones.

KING RICHARD II:
Can sick men play so nicely with their names?

JOHN OF GAUNT:
No, misery makes sport to mock itself:
Since thou dost seek to kill my name in me,
I mock my name, great king, to flatter thee.

KING RICHARD II:
Should dying men flatter with those that live?

JOHN OF GAUNT:
No, no, men living flatter those that die.

KING RICHARD II:
Thou, now a-dying, say'st thou flatterest me.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
O, no! thou diest, though I the sicker be.

KING RICHARD II:
I am in health, I breathe, and see thee ill.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
Now He that made me knows I see thee ill;
Ill in myself to see, and in thee seeing ill.
Thy death-bed is no lesser than thy land
Wherein thou liest in reputation sick;
And thou, too careless patient as thou art,
Commit'st thy anointed body to the cure
Of those physicians that first wounded thee:
A thousand flatterers sit within thy crown,
Whose compass is no bigger than thy head;
And yet, incaged in so small a verge,
The waste is no whit lesser than thy land.
O, had thy grandsire with a prophet's eye
Seen how his son's son should destroy his sons,
From forth thy reach he would have laid thy shame,
Deposing thee before thou wert possess'd,
Which art possess'd now to depose thyself.
Why, cousin, wert thou regent of the world,
It were a shame to let this land by lease;
But for thy world enjoying but this land,
Is it not more than shame to shame it so?
Landlord of England art thou now, not king:
Thy state of law is bondslave to the law; And thou--

KING RICHARD II:
A lunatic lean-witted fool,
Presuming on an ague's privilege,
Darest with thy frozen admonition
Make pale our cheek, chasing the royal blood
With fury from his native residence.
Now, by my seat's right royal majesty,
Wert thou not brother to great Edward's son,
This tongue that runs so roundly in thy head
Should run thy head from thy unreverent shoulders.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
O, spare me not, my brother Edward's son,
For that I was his father Edward's son;
That blood already, like the pelican,
Hast thou tapp'd out and drunkenly caroused:
My brother Gloucester, plain well-meaning soul,
Whom fair befal in heaven 'mongst happy souls!
May be a precedent and witness good
That thou respect'st not spilling Edward's blood:
Join with the present sickness that I have;
And thy unkindness be like crooked age,
To crop at once a too long wither'd flower.
Live in thy shame, but die not shame with thee!
These words hereafter thy tormentors be!
Convey me to my bed, then to my grave:
Love they to live that love and honour have.

KING RICHARD II:
And let them die that age and sullens have;
For both hast thou, and both become the grave.

DUKE OF YORK:
I do beseech your majesty, impute his words
To wayward sickliness and age in him:
He loves you, on my life, and holds you dear
As Harry Duke of Hereford, were he here.

KING RICHARD II:
Right, you say true: as Hereford's love, so his;
As theirs, so mine; and all be as it is.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
My liege, old Gaunt commends him to your majesty.

KING RICHARD II:
What says he?

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Nay, nothing; all is said
His tongue is now a stringless instrument;
Words, life and all, old Lancaster hath spent.

DUKE OF YORK:
Be York the next that must be bankrupt so!
Though death be poor, it ends a mortal woe.

KING RICHARD II:
The ripest fruit first falls, and so doth he;
His time is spent, our pilgrimage must be.
So much for that. Now for our Irish wars:
We must supplant those rough rug-headed kerns,
Which live like venom where no venom else
But only they have privilege to live.
And for these great affairs do ask some charge,
Towards our assistance we do seize to us
The plate, corn, revenues and moveables,
Whereof our uncle Gaunt did stand possess'd.

DUKE OF YORK:
How long shall I be patient? ah, how long
Shall tender duty make me suffer wrong?
Not Gloucester's death, nor Hereford's banishment
Not Gaunt's rebukes, nor England's private wrongs,
Nor the prevention of poor Bolingbroke
About his marriage, nor my own disgrace,
Have ever made me sour my patient cheek,
Or bend one wrinkle on my sovereign's face.
I am the last of noble Edward's sons,
Of whom thy father, Prince of Wales, was first:
In war was never lion raged more fierce,
In peace was never gentle lamb more mild,
Than was that young and princely gentleman.
His face thou hast, for even so look'd he,
Accomplish'd with the number of thy hours;
But when he frown'd, it was against the French
And not against his friends; his noble hand
Did will what he did spend and spent not that
Which his triumphant father's hand had won;
His hands were guilty of no kindred blood,
But bloody with the enemies of his kin.
O Richard! York is too far gone with grief,
Or else he never would compare between.

KING RICHARD II:
Why, uncle, what's the matter?

DUKE OF YORK:
O my liege,
Pardon me, if you please; if not, I, pleased
Not to be pardon'd, am content withal.
Seek you to seize and gripe into your hands
The royalties and rights of banish'd Hereford?
Is not Gaunt dead, and doth not Hereford live?
Was not Gaunt just, and is not Harry true?
Did not the one deserve to have an heir?
Is not his heir a well-deserving son?
Take Hereford's rights away, and take from Time
His charters and his customary rights;
Let not to-morrow then ensue to-day;
Be not thyself; for how art thou a king
But by fair sequence and succession?
Now, afore God--God forbid I say true!--
If you do wrongfully seize Hereford's rights,
Call in the letters patent that he hath
By his attorneys-general to sue
His livery, and deny his offer'd homage,
You pluck a thousand dangers on your head,
You lose a thousand well-disposed hearts
And prick my tender patience, to those thoughts
Which honour and allegiance cannot think.

KING RICHARD II:
Think what you will, we seize into our hands
His plate, his goods, his money and his lands.

DUKE OF YORK:
I'll not be by the while: my liege, farewell:
What will ensue hereof, there's none can tell;
But by bad courses may be understood
That their events can never fall out good.

KING RICHARD II:
Go, Bushy, to the Earl of Wiltshire straight:
Bid him repair to us to Ely House
To see this business. To-morrow next
We will for Ireland; and 'tis time, I trow:
And we create, in absence of ourself,
Our uncle York lord governor of England;
For he is just and always loved us well.
Come on, our queen: to-morrow must we part;
Be merry, for our time of stay is short

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Well, lords, the Duke of Lancaster is dead.

LORD ROSS:
And living too; for now his son is duke.

LORD WILLOUGHBY:
Barely in title, not in revenue.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Richly in both, if justice had her right.

LORD ROSS:
My heart is great; but it must break with silence,
Ere't be disburden'd with a liberal tongue.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Nay, speak thy mind; and let him ne'er speak more
That speaks thy words again to do thee harm!

LORD WILLOUGHBY:
Tends that thou wouldst speak to the Duke of Hereford?
If it be so, out with it boldly, man;
Quick is mine ear to hear of good towards him.

LORD ROSS:
No good at all that I can do for him;
Unless you call it good to pity him,
Bereft and gelded of his patrimony.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Now, afore God, 'tis shame such wrongs are borne
In him, a royal prince, and many moe
Of noble blood in this declining land.
The king is not himself, but basely led
By flatterers; and what they will inform,
Merely in hate, 'gainst any of us all,
That will the king severely prosecute
'Gainst us, our lives, our children, and our heirs.

LORD ROSS:
The commons hath he pill'd with grievous taxes,
And quite lost their hearts: the nobles hath he fined
For ancient quarrels, and quite lost their hearts.

LORD WILLOUGHBY:
And daily new exactions are devised,
As blanks, benevolences, and I wot not what:
But what, o' God's name, doth become of this?

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Wars have not wasted it, for warr'd he hath not,
But basely yielded upon compromise
That which his noble ancestors achieved with blows:
More hath he spent in peace than they in wars.

LORD ROSS:
The Earl of Wiltshire hath the realm in farm.

LORD WILLOUGHBY:
The king's grown bankrupt, like a broken man.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Reproach and dissolution hangeth over him.

LORD ROSS:
He hath not money for these Irish wars,
His burthenous taxations notwithstanding,
But by the robbing of the banish'd duke.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
His noble kinsman: most degenerate king!
But, lords, we hear this fearful tempest sing,
Yet see no shelter to avoid the storm;
We see the wind sit sore upon our sails,
And yet we strike not, but securely perish.

LORD ROSS:
We see the very wreck that we must suffer;
And unavoided is the danger now,
For suffering so the causes of our wreck.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Not so; even through the hollow eyes of death
I spy life peering; but I dare not say
How near the tidings of our comfort is.

LORD WILLOUGHBY:
Nay, let us share thy thoughts, as thou dost ours.

LORD ROSS:
Be confident to speak, Northumberland:
We three are but thyself; and, speaking so,
Thy words are but as thoughts; therefore, be bold.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Then thus: I have from Port le Blanc, a bay
In Brittany, received intelligence
That Harry Duke of Hereford, Rainold Lord Cobham,
That late broke from the Duke of Exeter,
His brother, Archbishop late of Canterbury,
Sir Thomas Erpingham, Sir John Ramston,
Sir John Norbery, Sir Robert Waterton and Francis Quoint,
All these well furnish'd by the Duke of Bretagne
With eight tall ships, three thousand men of war,
Are making hither with all due expedience
And shortly mean to touch our northern shore:
Perhaps they had ere this, but that they stay
The first departing of the king for Ireland.
If then we shall shake off our slavish yoke,
Imp out our drooping country's broken wing,
Redeem from broking pawn the blemish'd crown,
Wipe off the dust that hides our sceptre's gilt
And make high majesty look like itself,
Away with me in post to Ravenspurgh;
But if you faint, as fearing to do so,
Stay and be secret, and myself will go.

LORD ROSS:
To horse, to horse! urge doubts to them that fear.

LORD WILLOUGHBY:
Hold out my horse, and I will first be there.

BUSHY:
Madam, your majesty is too much sad:
You promised, when you parted with the king,
To lay aside life-harming heaviness
And entertain a cheerful disposition.

QUEEN:
To please the king I did; to please myself
I cannot do it; yet I know no cause
Why I should welcome such a guest as grief,
Save bidding farewell to so sweet a guest
As my sweet Richard: yet again, methinks,
Some unborn sorrow, ripe in fortune's womb,
Is coming towards me, and my inward soul
With nothing trembles: at some thing it grieves,
More than with parting from my lord the king.

BUSHY:
Each substance of a grief hath twenty shadows,
Which shows like grief itself, but is not so;
For sorrow's eye, glazed with blinding tears,
Divides one thing entire to many objects;
Like perspectives, which rightly gazed upon
Show nothing but confusion, eyed awry
Distinguish form: so your sweet majesty,
Looking awry upon your lord's departure,
Find shapes of grief, more than himself, to wail;
Which, look'd on as it is, is nought but shadows
Of what it is not. Then, thrice-gracious queen,
More than your lord's departure weep not: more's not seen;
Or if it be, 'tis with false sorrow's eye,
Which for things true weeps things imaginary.

QUEEN:
It may be so; but yet my inward soul
Persuades me it is otherwise: howe'er it be,
I cannot but be sad; so heavy sad
As, though on thinking on no thought I think,
Makes me with heavy nothing faint and shrink.

BUSHY:
'Tis nothing but conceit, my gracious lady.

QUEEN:
'Tis nothing less: conceit is still derived
From some forefather grief; mine is not so,
For nothing had begot my something grief;
Or something hath the nothing that I grieve:
'Tis in reversion that I do possess;
But what it is, that is not yet known; what
I cannot name; 'tis nameless woe, I wot.

GREEN:
God save your majesty! and well met, gentlemen:
I hope the king is not yet shipp'd for Ireland.

QUEEN:
Why hopest thou so? 'tis better hope he is;
For his designs crave haste, his haste good hope:
Then wherefore dost thou hope he is not shipp'd?

GREEN:
That he, our hope, might have retired his power,
And driven into despair an enemy's hope,
Who strongly hath set footing in this land:
The banish'd Bolingbroke repeals himself,
And with uplifted arms is safe arrived
At Ravenspurgh.

QUEEN:
Now God in heaven forbid!

GREEN:
Ah, madam, 'tis too true: and that is worse,
The Lord Northumberland, his son young Henry Percy,
The Lords of Ross, Beaumond, and Willoughby,
With all their powerful friends, are fled to him.

BUSHY:
Why have you not proclaim'd Northumberland
And all the rest revolted faction traitors?

GREEN:
We have: whereupon the Earl of Worcester
Hath broke his staff, resign'd his stewardship,
And all the household servants fled with him
To Bolingbroke.

QUEEN:
So, Green, thou art the midwife to my woe,
And Bolingbroke my sorrow's dismal heir:
Now hath my soul brought forth her prodigy,
And I, a gasping new-deliver'd mother,
Have woe to woe, sorrow to sorrow join'd.

BUSHY:
Despair not, madam.

QUEEN:
Who shall hinder me?
I will despair, and be at enmity
With cozening hope: he is a flatterer,
A parasite, a keeper back of death,
Who gently would dissolve the bands of life,
Which false hope lingers in extremity.

GREEN:
Here comes the Duke of York.

QUEEN:
With signs of war about his aged neck:
O, full of careful business are his looks!
Uncle, for God's sake, speak comfortable words.

DUKE OF YORK:
Should I do so, I should belie my thoughts:
Comfort's in heaven; and we are on the earth,
Where nothing lives but crosses, cares and grief.
Your husband, he is gone to save far off,
Whilst others come to make him lose at home:
Here am I left to underprop his land,
Who, weak with age, cannot support myself:
Now comes the sick hour that his surfeit made;
Now shall he try his friends that flatter'd him.

Servant:
My lord, your son was gone before I came.

DUKE OF YORK:
He was? Why, so! go all which way it will!
The nobles they are fled, the commons they are cold,
And will, I fear, revolt on Hereford's side.
Sirrah, get thee to Plashy, to my sister Gloucester;
Bid her send me presently a thousand pound:
Hold, take my ring.

Servant:
My lord, I had forgot to tell your lordship,
To-day, as I came by, I called there;
But I shall grieve you to report the rest.

DUKE OF YORK:
What is't, knave?

Servant:
An hour before I came, the duchess died.

DUKE OF YORK:
God for his mercy! what a tide of woes
Comes rushing on this woeful land at once!
I know not what to do: I would to God,
So my untruth had not provoked him to it,
The king had cut off my head with my brother's.
What, are there no posts dispatch'd for Ireland?
How shall we do for money for these wars?
Come, sister,--cousin, I would say--pray, pardon me.
Go, fellow, get thee home, provide some carts
And bring away the armour that is there.
Gentlemen, will you go muster men?
If I know how or which way to order these affairs
Thus thrust disorderly into my hands,
Never believe me. Both are my kinsmen:
The one is my sovereign, whom both my oath
And duty bids defend; the other again
Is my kinsman, whom the king hath wrong'd,
Whom conscience and my kindred bids to right.
Well, somewhat we must do. Come, cousin, I'll
Dispose of you.
Gentlemen, go, muster up your men,
And meet me presently at Berkeley.
I should to Plashy too;
But time will not permit: all is uneven,
And every thing is left at six and seven.

BUSHY:
The wind sits fair for news to go to Ireland,
But none returns. For us to levy power
Proportionable to the enemy
Is all unpossible.

GREEN:
Besides, our nearness to the king in love
Is near the hate of those love not the king.

BAGOT:
And that's the wavering commons: for their love
Lies in their purses, and whoso empties them
By so much fills their hearts with deadly hate.

BUSHY:
Wherein the king stands generally condemn'd.

BAGOT:
If judgement lie in them, then so do we,
Because we ever have been near the king.

GREEN:
Well, I will for refuge straight to Bristol castle:
The Earl of Wiltshire is already there.

BUSHY:
Thither will I with you; for little office
The hateful commons will perform for us,
Except like curs to tear us all to pieces.
Will you go along with us?

BAGOT:
No; I will to Ireland to his majesty.
Farewell: if heart's presages be not vain,
We three here art that ne'er shall meet again.

BUSHY:
That's as York thrives to beat back Bolingbroke.

GREEN:
Alas, poor duke! the task he undertakes
Is numbering sands and drinking oceans dry:
Where one on his side fights, thousands will fly.
Farewell at once, for once, for all, and ever.

BUSHY:
Well, we may meet again.

BAGOT:
I fear me, never.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
How far is it, my lord, to Berkeley now?

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Believe me, noble lord,
I am a stranger here in Gloucestershire:
These high wild hills and rough uneven ways
Draws out our miles, and makes them wearisome,
And yet your fair discourse hath been as sugar,
Making the hard way sweet and delectable.
But I bethink me what a weary way
From Ravenspurgh to Cotswold will be found
In Ross and Willoughby, wanting your company,
Which, I protest, hath very much beguiled
The tediousness and process of my travel:
But theirs is sweetened with the hope to have
The present benefit which I possess;
And hope to joy is little less in joy
Than hope enjoy'd: by this the weary lords
Shall make their way seem short, as mine hath done
By sight of what I have, your noble company.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Of much less value is my company
Than your good words. But who comes here?

NORTHUMBERLAND:
It is my son, young Harry Percy,
Sent from my brother Worcester, whencesoever.
Harry, how fares your uncle?

HENRY PERCY:
I had thought, my lord, to have learn'd his health of you.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Why, is he not with the queen?

HENRY PERCY:
No, my good Lord; he hath forsook the court,
Broken his staff of office and dispersed
The household of the king.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
What was his reason?
He was not so resolved when last we spake together.

HENRY PERCY:
Because your lordship was proclaimed traitor.
But he, my lord, is gone to Ravenspurgh,
To offer service to the Duke of Hereford,
And sent me over by Berkeley, to discover
What power the Duke of York had levied there;
Then with directions to repair to Ravenspurgh.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Have you forgot the Duke of Hereford, boy?

HENRY PERCY:
No, my good lord, for that is not forgot
Which ne'er I did remember: to my knowledge,
I never in my life did look on him.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Then learn to know him now; this is the duke.

HENRY PERCY:
My gracious lord, I tender you my service,
Such as it is, being tender, raw and young:
Which elder days shall ripen and confirm
To more approved service and desert.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
I thank thee, gentle Percy; and be sure
I count myself in nothing else so happy
As in a soul remembering my good friends;
And, as my fortune ripens with thy love,
It shall be still thy true love's recompense:
My heart this covenant makes, my hand thus seals it.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
How far is it to Berkeley? and what stir
Keeps good old York there with his men of war?

HENRY PERCY:
There stands the castle, by yon tuft of trees,
Mann'd with three hundred men, as I have heard;
And in it are the Lords of York, Berkeley, and Seymour;
None else of name and noble estimate.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Here come the Lords of Ross and Willoughby,
Bloody with spurring, fiery-red with haste.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Welcome, my lords. I wot your love pursues
A banish'd traitor: all my treasury
Is yet but unfelt thanks, which more enrich'd
Shall be your love and labour's recompense.

LORD ROSS:
Your presence makes us rich, most noble lord.

LORD WILLOUGHBY:
And far surmounts our labour to attain it.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Evermore thanks, the exchequer of the poor;
Which, till my infant fortune comes to years,
Stands for my bounty. But who comes here?

NORTHUMBERLAND:
It is my Lord of Berkeley, as I guess.

LORD BERKELEY:
My Lord of Hereford, my message is to you.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
My lord, my answer is--to Lancaster;
And I am come to seek that name in England;
And I must find that title in your tongue,
Before I make reply to aught you say.

LORD BERKELEY:
Mistake me not, my lord; 'tis not my meaning
To raze one title of your honour out:
To you, my lord, I come, what lord you will,
From the most gracious regent of this land,
The Duke of York, to know what pricks you on
To take advantage of the absent time
And fright our native peace with self-born arms.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
I shall not need transport my words by you;
Here comes his grace in person. My noble uncle!

DUKE OF YORK:
Show me thy humble heart, and not thy knee,
Whose duty is deceiveable and false.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
My gracious uncle--

DUKE OF YORK:
Tut, tut!
Grace me no grace, nor uncle me no uncle:
I am no traitor's uncle; and that word 'grace.'
In an ungracious mouth is but profane.
Why have those banish'd and forbidden legs
Dared once to touch a dust of England's ground?
But then more 'why?' why have they dared to march
So many miles upon her peaceful bosom,
Frighting her pale-faced villages with war
And ostentation of despised arms?
Comest thou because the anointed king is hence?
Why, foolish boy, the king is left behind,
And in my loyal bosom lies his power.
Were I but now the lord of such hot youth
As when brave Gaunt, thy father, and myself
Rescued the Black Prince, that young Mars of men,
From forth the ranks of many thousand French,
O, then how quickly should this arm of mine.
Now prisoner to the palsy, chastise thee
And minister correction to thy fault!

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
My gracious uncle, let me know my fault:
On what condition stands it and wherein?

DUKE OF YORK:
Even in condition of the worst degree,
In gross rebellion and detested treason:
Thou art a banish'd man, and here art come
Before the expiration of thy time,
In braving arms against thy sovereign.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
As I was banish'd, I was banish'd Hereford;
But as I come, I come for Lancaster.
And, noble uncle, I beseech your grace
Look on my wrongs with an indifferent eye:
You are my father, for methinks in you
I see old Gaunt alive; O, then, my father,
Will you permit that I shall stand condemn'd
A wandering vagabond; my rights and royalties
Pluck'd from my arms perforce and given away
To upstart unthrifts? Wherefore was I born?
If that my cousin king be King of England,
It must be granted I am Duke of Lancaster.
You have a son, Aumerle, my noble cousin;
Had you first died, and he been thus trod down,
He should have found his uncle Gaunt a father,
To rouse his wrongs and chase them to the bay.
I am denied to sue my livery here,
And yet my letters-patents give me leave:
My father's goods are all distrain'd and sold,
And these and all are all amiss employ'd.
What would you have me do? I am a subject,
And I challenge law: attorneys are denied me;
And therefore, personally I lay my claim
To my inheritance of free descent.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
The noble duke hath been too much abused.

LORD ROSS:
It stands your grace upon to do him right.

LORD WILLOUGHBY:
Base men by his endowments are made great.

DUKE OF YORK:
My lords of England, let me tell you this:
I have had feeling of my cousin's wrongs
And laboured all I could to do him right;
But in this kind to come, in braving arms,
Be his own carver and cut out his way,
To find out right with wrong, it may not be;
And you that do abet him in this kind
Cherish rebellion and are rebels all.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
The noble duke hath sworn his coming is
But for his own; and for the right of that
We all have strongly sworn to give him aid;
And let him ne'er see joy that breaks that oath!

DUKE OF YORK:
Well, well, I see the issue of these arms:
I cannot mend it, I must needs confess,
Because my power is weak and all ill left:
But if I could, by Him that gave me life,
I would attach you all and make you stoop
Unto the sovereign mercy of the king;
But since I cannot, be it known to you
I do remain as neuter. So, fare you well;
Unless you please to enter in the castle
And there repose you for this night.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
An offer, uncle, that we will accept:
But we must win your grace to go with us
To Bristol castle, which they say is held
By Bushy, Bagot and their complices,
The caterpillars of the commonwealth,
Which I have sworn to weed and pluck away.

DUKE OF YORK:
It may be I will go with you: but yet I'll pause;
For I am loath to break our country's laws.
Nor friends nor foes, to me welcome you are:
Things past redress are now with me past care.

Captain:
My lord of Salisbury, we have stay'd ten days,
And hardly kept our countrymen together,
And yet we hear no tidings from the king;
Therefore we will disperse ourselves: farewell.

EARL OF SALISBURY:
Stay yet another day, thou trusty Welshman:
The king reposeth all his confidence in thee.

Captain:
'Tis thought the king is dead; we will not stay.
The bay-trees in our country are all wither'd
And meteors fright the fixed stars of heaven;
The pale-faced moon looks bloody on the earth
And lean-look'd prophets whisper fearful change;
Rich men look sad and ruffians dance and leap,
The one in fear to lose what they enjoy,
The other to enjoy by rage and war:
These signs forerun the death or fall of kings.
Farewell: our countrymen are gone and fled,
As well assured Richard their king is dead.

EARL OF SALISBURY:
Ah, Richard, with the eyes of heavy mind
I see thy glory like a shooting star
Fall to the base earth from the firmament.
Thy sun sets weeping in the lowly west,
Witnessing storms to come, woe and unrest:
Thy friends are fled to wait upon thy foes,
And crossly to thy good all fortune goes.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Bring forth these men.
Bushy and Green, I will not vex your souls--
Since presently your souls must part your bodies--
With too much urging your pernicious lives,
For 'twere no charity; yet, to wash your blood
From off my hands, here in the view of men
I will unfold some causes of your deaths.
You have misled a prince, a royal king,
A happy gentleman in blood and lineaments,
By you unhappied and disfigured clean:
You have in manner with your sinful hours
Made a divorce betwixt his queen and him,
Broke the possession of a royal bed
And stain'd the beauty of a fair queen's cheeks
With tears drawn from her eyes by your foul wrongs.
Myself, a prince by fortune of my birth,
Near to the king in blood, and near in love
Till you did make him misinterpret me,
Have stoop'd my neck under your injuries,
And sigh'd my English breath in foreign clouds,
Eating the bitter bread of banishment;
Whilst you have fed upon my signories,
Dispark'd my parks and fell'd my forest woods,
From my own windows torn my household coat,
Razed out my imprese, leaving me no sign,
Save men's opinions and my living blood,
To show the world I am a gentleman.
This and much more, much more than twice all this,
Condemns you to the death. See them deliver'd over
To execution and the hand of death.

BUSHY:
More welcome is the stroke of death to me
Than Bolingbroke to England. Lords, farewell.

GREEN:
My comfort is that heaven will take our souls
And plague injustice with the pains of hell.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
My Lord Northumberland, see them dispatch'd.
Uncle, you say the queen is at your house;
For God's sake, fairly let her be entreated:
Tell her I send to her my kind commends;
Take special care my greetings be deliver'd.

DUKE OF YORK:
A gentleman of mine I have dispatch'd
With letters of your love to her at large.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Thank, gentle uncle. Come, lords, away.
To fight with Glendower and his complices:
Awhile to work, and after holiday.

KING RICHARD II:
Barkloughly castle call they this at hand?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Yea, my lord. How brooks your grace the air,
After your late tossing on the breaking seas?

KING RICHARD II:
Needs must I like it well: I weep for joy
To stand upon my kingdom once again.
Dear earth, I do salute thee with my hand,
Though rebels wound thee with their horses' hoofs:
As a long-parted mother with her child
Plays fondly with her tears and smiles in meeting,
So, weeping, smiling, greet I thee, my earth,
And do thee favours with my royal hands.
Feed not thy sovereign's foe, my gentle earth,
Nor with thy sweets comfort his ravenous sense;
But let thy spiders, that suck up thy venom,
And heavy-gaited toads lie in their way,
Doing annoyance to the treacherous feet
Which with usurping steps do trample thee:
Yield stinging nettles to mine enemies;
And when they from thy bosom pluck a flower,
Guard it, I pray thee, with a lurking adder
Whose double tongue may with a mortal touch
Throw death upon thy sovereign's enemies.
Mock not my senseless conjuration, lords:
This earth shall have a feeling and these stones
Prove armed soldiers, ere her native king
Shall falter under foul rebellion's arms.

BISHOP OF CARLISLE:
Fear not, my lord: that Power that made you king
Hath power to keep you king in spite of all.
The means that heaven yields must be embraced,
And not neglected; else, if heaven would,
And we will not, heaven's offer we refuse,
The proffer'd means of succor and redress.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
He means, my lord, that we are too remiss;
Whilst Bolingbroke, through our security,
Grows strong and great in substance and in power.

KING RICHARD II:
Discomfortable cousin! know'st thou not
That when the searching eye of heaven is hid,
Behind the globe, that lights the lower world,
Then thieves and robbers range abroad unseen
In murders and in outrage, boldly here;
But when from under this terrestrial ball
He fires the proud tops of the eastern pines
And darts his light through every guilty hole,
Then murders, treasons and detested sins,
The cloak of night being pluck'd from off their backs,
Stand bare and naked, trembling at themselves?
So when this thief, this traitor, Bolingbroke,
Who all this while hath revell'd in the night
Whilst we were wandering with the antipodes,
Shall see us rising in our throne, the east,
His treasons will sit blushing in his face,
Not able to endure the sight of day,
But self-affrighted tremble at his sin.
Not all the water in the rough rude sea
Can wash the balm off from an anointed king;
The breath of worldly men cannot depose
The deputy elected by the Lord:
For every man that Bolingbroke hath press'd
To lift shrewd steel against our golden crown,
God for his Richard hath in heavenly pay
A glorious angel: then, if angels fight,
Weak men must fall, for heaven still guards the right.
Welcome, my lord how far off lies your power?

EARL OF SALISBURY:
Nor near nor farther off, my gracious lord,
Than this weak arm: discomfort guides my tongue
And bids me speak of nothing but despair.
One day too late, I fear me, noble lord,
Hath clouded all thy happy days on earth:
O, call back yesterday, bid time return,
And thou shalt have twelve thousand fighting men!
To-day, to-day, unhappy day, too late,
O'erthrows thy joys, friends, fortune and thy state:
For all the Welshmen, hearing thou wert dead.
Are gone to Bolingbroke, dispersed and fled.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Comfort, my liege; why looks your grace so pale?

KING RICHARD II:
But now the blood of twenty thousand men
Did triumph in my face, and they are fled;
And, till so much blood thither come again,
Have I not reason to look pale and dead?
All souls that will be safe fly from my side,
For time hath set a blot upon my pride.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Comfort, my liege; remember who you are.

KING RICHARD II:
I had forgot myself; am I not king?
Awake, thou coward majesty! thou sleepest.
Is not the king's name twenty thousand names?
Arm, arm, my name! a puny subject strikes
At thy great glory. Look not to the ground,
Ye favourites of a king: are we not high?
High be our thoughts: I know my uncle York
Hath power enough to serve our turn. But who comes here?

SIR STEPHEN SCROOP:
More health and happiness betide my liege
Than can my care-tuned tongue deliver him!

KING RICHARD II:
Mine ear is open and my heart prepared;
The worst is worldly loss thou canst unfold.
Say, is my kingdom lost? why, 'twas my care
And what loss is it to be rid of care?
Strives Bolingbroke to be as great as we?
Greater he shall not be; if he serve God,
We'll serve Him too and be his fellow so:
Revolt our subjects? that we cannot mend;
They break their faith to God as well as us:
Cry woe, destruction, ruin and decay:
The worst is death, and death will have his day.

SIR STEPHEN SCROOP:
Glad am I that your highness is so arm'd
To bear the tidings of calamity.
Like an unseasonable stormy day,
Which makes the silver rivers drown their shores,
As if the world were all dissolved to tears,
So high above his limits swells the rage
Of Bolingbroke, covering your fearful land
With hard bright steel and hearts harder than steel.
White-beards have arm'd their thin and hairless scalps
Against thy majesty; boys, with women's voices,
Strive to speak big and clap their female joints
In stiff unwieldy arms against thy crown:
The very beadsmen learn to bend their bows
Of double-fatal yew against thy state;
Yea, distaff-women manage rusty bills
Against thy seat: both young and old rebel,
And all goes worse than I have power to tell.

KING RICHARD II:
Too well, too well thou tell'st a tale so ill.
Where is the Earl of Wiltshire? where is Bagot?
What is become of Bushy? where is Green?
That they have let the dangerous enemy
Measure our confines with such peaceful steps?
If we prevail, their heads shall pay for it:
I warrant they have made peace with Bolingbroke.

SIR STEPHEN SCROOP:
Peace have they made with him indeed, my lord.

KING RICHARD II:
O villains, vipers, damn'd without redemption!
Dogs, easily won to fawn on any man!
Snakes, in my heart-blood warm'd, that sting my heart!
Three Judases, each one thrice worse than Judas!
Would they make peace? terrible hell make war
Upon their spotted souls for this offence!

SIR STEPHEN SCROOP:
Sweet love, I see, changing his property,
Turns to the sourest and most deadly hate:
Again uncurse their souls; their peace is made
With heads, and not with hands; those whom you curse
Have felt the worst of death's destroying wound
And lie full low, graved in the hollow ground.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Is Bushy, Green, and the Earl of Wiltshire dead?

SIR STEPHEN SCROOP:
Ay, all of them at Bristol lost their heads.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Where is the duke my father with his power?

KING RICHARD II:
No matter where; of comfort no man speak:
Let's talk of graves, of worms, and epitaphs;
Make dust our paper and with rainy eyes
Write sorrow on the bosom of the earth,
Let's choose executors and talk of wills:
And yet not so, for what can we bequeath
Save our deposed bodies to the ground?
Our lands, our lives and all are Bolingbroke's,
And nothing can we call our own but death
And that small model of the barren earth
Which serves as paste and cover to our bones.
For God's sake, let us sit upon the ground
And tell sad stories of the death of kings;
How some have been deposed; some slain in war,
Some haunted by the ghosts they have deposed;
Some poison'd by their wives: some sleeping kill'd;
All murder'd: for within the hollow crown
That rounds the mortal temples of a king
Keeps Death his court and there the antic sits,
Scoffing his state and grinning at his pomp,
Allowing him a breath, a little scene,
To monarchize, be fear'd and kill with looks,
Infusing him with self and vain conceit,
As if this flesh which walls about our life,
Were brass impregnable, and humour'd thus
Comes at the last and with a little pin
Bores through his castle wall, and farewell king!
Cover your heads and mock not flesh and blood
With solemn reverence: throw away respect,
Tradition, form and ceremonious duty,
For you have but mistook me all this while:
I live with bread like you, feel want,
Taste grief, need friends: subjected thus,
How can you say to me, I am a king?

BISHOP OF CARLISLE:
My lord, wise men ne'er sit and wail their woes,
But presently prevent the ways to wail.
To fear the foe, since fear oppresseth strength,
Gives in your weakness strength unto your foe,
And so your follies fight against yourself.
Fear and be slain; no worse can come to fight:
And fight and die is death destroying death;
Where fearing dying pays death servile breath.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
My father hath a power; inquire of him
And learn to make a body of a limb.

KING RICHARD II:
Thou chidest me well: proud Bolingbroke, I come
To change blows with thee for our day of doom.
This ague fit of fear is over-blown;
An easy task it is to win our own.
Say, Scroop, where lies our uncle with his power?
Speak sweetly, man, although thy looks be sour.

SIR STEPHEN SCROOP:
Men judge by the complexion of the sky
The state and inclination of the day:
So may you by my dull and heavy eye,
My tongue hath but a heavier tale to say.
I play the torturer, by small and small
To lengthen out the worst that must be spoken:
Your uncle York is join'd with Bolingbroke,
And all your northern castles yielded up,
And all your southern gentlemen in arms
Upon his party.

KING RICHARD II:
Thou hast said enough.
Beshrew thee, cousin, which didst lead me forth
Of that sweet way I was in to despair!
What say you now? what comfort have we now?
By heaven, I'll hate him everlastingly
That bids me be of comfort any more.
Go to Flint castle: there I'll pine away;
A king, woe's slave, shall kingly woe obey.
That power I have, discharge; and let them go
To ear the land that hath some hope to grow,
For I have none: let no man speak again
To alter this, for counsel is but vain.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
My liege, one word.

KING RICHARD II:
He does me double wrong
That wounds me with the flatteries of his tongue.
Discharge my followers: let them hence away,
From Richard's night to Bolingbroke's fair day.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
So that by this intelligence we learn
The Welshmen are dispersed, and Salisbury
Is gone to meet the king, who lately landed
With some few private friends upon this coast.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
The news is very fair and good, my lord:
Richard not far from hence hath hid his head.

DUKE OF YORK:
It would beseem the Lord Northumberland
To say 'King Richard:' alack the heavy day
When such a sacred king should hide his head.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Your grace mistakes; only to be brief
Left I his title out.

DUKE OF YORK:
The time hath been,
Would you have been so brief with him, he would
Have been so brief with you, to shorten you,
For taking so the head, your whole head's length.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Mistake not, uncle, further than you should.

DUKE OF YORK:
Take not, good cousin, further than you should.
Lest you mistake the heavens are o'er our heads.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
I know it, uncle, and oppose not myself
Against their will. But who comes here?
Welcome, Harry: what, will not this castle yield?

HENRY PERCY:
The castle royally is mann'd, my lord,
Against thy entrance.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Royally!
Why, it contains no king?

HENRY PERCY:
Yes, my good lord,
It doth contain a king; King Richard lies
Within the limits of yon lime and stone:
And with him are the Lord Aumerle, Lord Salisbury,
Sir Stephen Scroop, besides a clergyman
Of holy reverence; who, I cannot learn.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
O, belike it is the Bishop of Carlisle.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Noble lords,
Go to the rude ribs of that ancient castle;
Through brazen trumpet send the breath of parley
Into his ruin'd ears, and thus deliver:
Henry Bolingbroke
On both his knees doth kiss King Richard's hand
And sends allegiance and true faith of heart
To his most royal person, hither come
Even at his feet to lay my arms and power,
Provided that my banishment repeal'd
And lands restored again be freely granted:
If not, I'll use the advantage of my power
And lay the summer's dust with showers of blood
Rain'd from the wounds of slaughter'd Englishmen:
The which, how far off from the mind of Bolingbroke
It is, such crimson tempest should bedrench
The fresh green lap of fair King Richard's land,
My stooping duty tenderly shall show.
Go, signify as much, while here we march
Upon the grassy carpet of this plain.
Let's march without the noise of threatening drum,
That from this castle's tatter'd battlements
Our fair appointments may be well perused.
Methinks King Richard and myself should meet
With no less terror than the elements
Of fire and water, when their thundering shock
At meeting tears the cloudy cheeks of heaven.
Be he the fire, I'll be the yielding water:
The rage be his, whilst on the earth I rain
My waters; on the earth, and not on him.
March on, and mark King Richard how he looks.
See, see, King Richard doth himself appear,
As doth the blushing discontented sun
From out the fiery portal of the east,
When he perceives the envious clouds are bent
To dim his glory and to stain the track
Of his bright passage to the occident.

DUKE OF YORK:
Yet looks he like a king: behold, his eye,
As bright as is the eagle's, lightens forth
Controlling majesty: alack, alack, for woe,
That any harm should stain so fair a show!

KING RICHARD II:
We are amazed; and thus long have we stood
To watch the fearful bending of thy knee,
Because we thought ourself thy lawful king:
And if we be, how dare thy joints forget
To pay their awful duty to our presence?
If we be not, show us the hand of God
That hath dismissed us from our stewardship;
For well we know, no hand of blood and bone
Can gripe the sacred handle of our sceptre,
Unless he do profane, steal, or usurp.
And though you think that all, as you have done,
Have torn their souls by turning them from us,
And we are barren and bereft of friends;
Yet know, my master, God omnipotent,
Is mustering in his clouds on our behalf
Armies of pestilence; and they shall strike
Your children yet unborn and unbegot,
That lift your vassal hands against my head
And threat the glory of my precious crown.
Tell Bolingbroke--for yond methinks he stands--
That every stride he makes upon my land
Is dangerous treason: he is come to open
The purple testament of bleeding war;
But ere the crown he looks for live in peace,
Ten thousand bloody crowns of mothers' sons
Shall ill become the flower of England's face,
Change the complexion of her maid-pale peace
To scarlet indignation and bedew
Her pastures' grass with faithful English blood.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
The king of heaven forbid our lord the king
Should so with civil and uncivil arms
Be rush'd upon! Thy thrice noble cousin
Harry Bolingbroke doth humbly kiss thy hand;
And by the honourable tomb he swears,
That stands upon your royal grandsire's bones,
And by the royalties of both your bloods,
Currents that spring from one most gracious head,
And by the buried hand of warlike Gaunt,
And by the worth and honour of himself,
Comprising all that may be sworn or said,
His coming hither hath no further scope
Than for his lineal royalties and to beg
Enfranchisement immediate on his knees:
Which on thy royal party granted once,
His glittering arms he will commend to rust,
His barbed steeds to stables, and his heart
To faithful service of your majesty.
This swears he, as he is a prince, is just;
And, as I am a gentleman, I credit him.

KING RICHARD II:
Northumberland, say thus the king returns:
His noble cousin is right welcome hither;
And all the number of his fair demands
Shall be accomplish'd without contradiction:
With all the gracious utterance thou hast
Speak to his gentle hearing kind commends.
We do debase ourselves, cousin, do we not,
To look so poorly and to speak so fair?
Shall we call back Northumberland, and send
Defiance to the traitor, and so die?


--- End of file: shakespear_07.txt ---


DUKE OF AUMERLE:
No, good my lord; let's fight with gentle words
Till time lend friends and friends their helpful swords.

KING RICHARD II:
O God, O God! that e'er this tongue of mine,
That laid the sentence of dread banishment
On yon proud man, should take it off again
With words of sooth! O that I were as great
As is my grief, or lesser than my name!
Or that I could forget what I have been,
Or not remember what I must be now!
Swell'st thou, proud heart? I'll give thee scope to beat,
Since foes have scope to beat both thee and me.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Northumberland comes back from Bolingbroke.

KING RICHARD II:
What must the king do now? must he submit?
The king shall do it: must he be deposed?
The king shall be contented: must he lose
The name of king? o' God's name, let it go:
I'll give my jewels for a set of beads,
My gorgeous palace for a hermitage,
My gay apparel for an almsman's gown,
My figured goblets for a dish of wood,
My sceptre for a palmer's walking staff,
My subjects for a pair of carved saints
And my large kingdom for a little grave,
A little little grave, an obscure grave;
Or I'll be buried in the king's highway,
Some way of common trade, where subjects' feet
May hourly trample on their sovereign's head;
For on my heart they tread now whilst I live;
And buried once, why not upon my head?
Aumerle, thou weep'st, my tender-hearted cousin!
We'll make foul weather with despised tears;
Our sighs and they shall lodge the summer corn,
And make a dearth in this revolting land.
Or shall we play the wantons with our woes,
And make some pretty match with shedding tears?
As thus, to drop them still upon one place,
Till they have fretted us a pair of graves
Within the earth; and, therein laid,--there lies
Two kinsmen digg'd their graves with weeping eyes.
Would not this ill do well? Well, well, I see
I talk but idly, and you laugh at me.
Most mighty prince, my Lord Northumberland,
What says King Bolingbroke? will his majesty
Give Richard leave to live till Richard die?
You make a leg, and Bolingbroke says ay.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
My lord, in the base court he doth attend
To speak with you; may it please you to come down.

KING RICHARD II:
Down, down I come; like glistering Phaethon,
Wanting the manage of unruly jades.
In the base court? Base court, where kings grow base,
To come at traitors' calls and do them grace.
In the base court? Come down? Down, court!
down, king!
For night-owls shriek where mounting larks
should sing.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
What says his majesty?

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Sorrow and grief of heart
Makes him speak fondly, like a frantic man
Yet he is come.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Stand all apart,
And show fair duty to his majesty.
My gracious lord,--

KING RICHARD II:
Fair cousin, you debase your princely knee
To make the base earth proud with kissing it:
Me rather had my heart might feel your love
Than my unpleased eye see your courtesy.
Up, cousin, up; your heart is up, I know,
Thus high at least, although your knee be low.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
My gracious lord, I come but for mine own.

KING RICHARD II:
Your own is yours, and I am yours, and all.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
So far be mine, my most redoubted lord,
As my true service shall deserve your love.

KING RICHARD II:
Well you deserve: they well deserve to have,
That know the strong'st and surest way to get.
Uncle, give me your hands: nay, dry your eyes;
Tears show their love, but want their remedies.
Cousin, I am too young to be your father,
Though you are old enough to be my heir.
What you will have, I'll give, and willing too;
For do we must what force will have us do.
Set on towards London, cousin, is it so?

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Yea, my good lord.

KING RICHARD II:
Then I must not say no.

QUEEN:
What sport shall we devise here in this garden,
To drive away the heavy thought of care?

Lady:
Madam, we'll play at bowls.

QUEEN:
'Twill make me think the world is full of rubs,
And that my fortune rubs against the bias.

Lady:
Madam, we'll dance.

QUEEN:
My legs can keep no measure in delight,
When my poor heart no measure keeps in grief:
Therefore, no dancing, girl; some other sport.

Lady:
Madam, we'll tell tales.

QUEEN:
Of sorrow or of joy?

Lady:
Of either, madam.

QUEEN:
Of neither, girl:
For of joy, being altogether wanting,
It doth remember me the more of sorrow;
Or if of grief, being altogether had,
It adds more sorrow to my want of joy:
For what I have I need not to repeat;
And what I want it boots not to complain.

Lady:
Madam, I'll sing.

QUEEN:
'Tis well that thou hast cause
But thou shouldst please me better, wouldst thou weep.

Lady:
I could weep, madam, would it do you good.

QUEEN:
And I could sing, would weeping do me good,
And never borrow any tear of thee.
But stay, here come the gardeners:
Let's step into the shadow of these trees.
My wretchedness unto a row of pins,
They'll talk of state; for every one doth so
Against a change; woe is forerun with woe.

Gardener:
Go, bind thou up yon dangling apricocks,
Which, like unruly children, make their sire
Stoop with oppression of their prodigal weight:
Give some supportance to the bending twigs.
Go thou, and like an executioner,
Cut off the heads of too fast growing sprays,
That look too lofty in our commonwealth:
All must be even in our government.
You thus employ'd, I will go root away
The noisome weeds, which without profit suck
The soil's fertility from wholesome flowers.

Servant:
Why should we in the compass of a pale
Keep law and form and due proportion,
Showing, as in a model, our firm estate,
When our sea-walled garden, the whole land,
Is full of weeds, her fairest flowers choked up,
Her fruit-trees all upturned, her hedges ruin'd,
Her knots disorder'd and her wholesome herbs
Swarming with caterpillars?

Gardener:
Hold thy peace:
He that hath suffer'd this disorder'd spring
Hath now himself met with the fall of leaf:
The weeds which his broad-spreading leaves did shelter,
That seem'd in eating him to hold him up,
Are pluck'd up root and all by Bolingbroke,
I mean the Earl of Wiltshire, Bushy, Green.

Servant:
What, are they dead?

Gardener:
They are; and Bolingbroke
Hath seized the wasteful king. O, what pity is it
That he had not so trimm'd and dress'd his land
As we this garden! We at time of year
Do wound the bark, the skin of our fruit-trees,
Lest, being over-proud in sap and blood,
With too much riches it confound itself:
Had he done so to great and growing men,
They might have lived to bear and he to taste
Their fruits of duty: superfluous branches
We lop away, that bearing boughs may live:
Had he done so, himself had borne the crown,
Which waste of idle hours hath quite thrown down.

Servant:
What, think you then the king shall be deposed?

Gardener:
Depress'd he is already, and deposed
'Tis doubt he will be: letters came last night
To a dear friend of the good Duke of York's,
That tell black tidings.

QUEEN:
O, I am press'd to death through want of speaking!
Thou, old Adam's likeness, set to dress this garden,
How dares thy harsh rude tongue sound this unpleasing news?
What Eve, what serpent, hath suggested thee
To make a second fall of cursed man?
Why dost thou say King Richard is deposed?
Darest thou, thou little better thing than earth,
Divine his downfall? Say, where, when, and how,
Camest thou by this ill tidings? speak, thou wretch.

Gardener:
Pardon me, madam: little joy have I
To breathe this news; yet what I say is true.
King Richard, he is in the mighty hold
Of Bolingbroke: their fortunes both are weigh'd:
In your lord's scale is nothing but himself,
And some few vanities that make him light;
But in the balance of great Bolingbroke,
Besides himself, are all the English peers,
And with that odds he weighs King Richard down.
Post you to London, and you will find it so;
I speak no more than every one doth know.

QUEEN:
Nimble mischance, that art so light of foot,
Doth not thy embassage belong to me,
And am I last that knows it? O, thou think'st
To serve me last, that I may longest keep
Thy sorrow in my breast. Come, ladies, go,
To meet at London London's king in woe.
What, was I born to this, that my sad look
Should grace the triumph of great Bolingbroke?
Gardener, for telling me these news of woe,
Pray God the plants thou graft'st may never grow.

GARDENER:
Poor queen! so that thy state might be no worse,
I would my skill were subject to thy curse.
Here did she fall a tear; here in this place
I'll set a bank of rue, sour herb of grace:
Rue, even for ruth, here shortly shall be seen,
In the remembrance of a weeping queen.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Call forth Bagot.
Now, Bagot, freely speak thy mind;
What thou dost know of noble Gloucester's death,
Who wrought it with the king, and who perform'd
The bloody office of his timeless end.

BAGOT:
Then set before my face the Lord Aumerle.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Cousin, stand forth, and look upon that man.

BAGOT:
My Lord Aumerle, I know your daring tongue
Scorns to unsay what once it hath deliver'd.
In that dead time when Gloucester's death was plotted,
I heard you say, 'Is not my arm of length,
That reacheth from the restful English court
As far as Calais, to mine uncle's head?'
Amongst much other talk, that very time,
I heard you say that you had rather refuse
The offer of an hundred thousand crowns
Than Bolingbroke's return to England;
Adding withal how blest this land would be
In this your cousin's death.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Princes and noble lords,
What answer shall I make to this base man?
Shall I so much dishonour my fair stars,
On equal terms to give him chastisement?
Either I must, or have mine honour soil'd
With the attainder of his slanderous lips.
There is my gage, the manual seal of death,
That marks thee out for hell: I say, thou liest,
And will maintain what thou hast said is false
In thy heart-blood, though being all too base
To stain the temper of my knightly sword.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Bagot, forbear; thou shalt not take it up.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Excepting one, I would he were the best
In all this presence that hath moved me so.

LORD FITZWATER:
If that thy valour stand on sympathy,
There is my gage, Aumerle, in gage to thine:
By that fair sun which shows me where thou stand'st,
I heard thee say, and vauntingly thou spakest it
That thou wert cause of noble Gloucester's death.
If thou deny'st it twenty times, thou liest;
And I will turn thy falsehood to thy heart,
Where it was forged, with my rapier's point.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Thou darest not, coward, live to see that day.

LORD FITZWATER:
Now by my soul, I would it were this hour.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Fitzwater, thou art damn'd to hell for this.

HENRY PERCY:
Aumerle, thou liest; his honour is as true
In this appeal as thou art all unjust;
And that thou art so, there I throw my gage,
To prove it on thee to the extremest point
Of mortal breathing: seize it, if thou darest.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
An if I do not, may my hands rot off
And never brandish more revengeful steel
Over the glittering helmet of my foe!

Lord:
I task the earth to the like, forsworn Aumerle;
And spur thee on with full as many lies
As may be holloa'd in thy treacherous ear
From sun to sun: there is my honour's pawn;
Engage it to the trial, if thou darest.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Who sets me else? by heaven, I'll throw at all:
I have a thousand spirits in one breast,
To answer twenty thousand such as you.

DUKE OF SURREY:
My Lord Fitzwater, I do remember well
The very time Aumerle and you did talk.

LORD FITZWATER:
'Tis very true: you were in presence then;
And you can witness with me this is true.

DUKE OF SURREY:
As false, by heaven, as heaven itself is true.

LORD FITZWATER:
Surrey, thou liest.

DUKE OF SURREY:
Dishonourable boy!
That lie shall lie so heavy on my sword,
That it shall render vengeance and revenge
Till thou the lie-giver and that lie do lie
In earth as quiet as thy father's skull:
In proof whereof, there is my honour's pawn;
Engage it to the trial, if thou darest.

LORD FITZWATER:
How fondly dost thou spur a forward horse!
If I dare eat, or drink, or breathe, or live,
I dare meet Surrey in a wilderness,
And spit upon him, whilst I say he lies,
And lies, and lies: there is my bond of faith,
To tie thee to my strong correction.
As I intend to thrive in this new world,
Aumerle is guilty of my true appeal:
Besides, I heard the banish'd Norfolk say
That thou, Aumerle, didst send two of thy men
To execute the noble duke at Calais.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Some honest Christian trust me with a gage
That Norfolk lies: here do I throw down this,
If he may be repeal'd, to try his honour.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
These differences shall all rest under gage
Till Norfolk be repeal'd: repeal'd he shall be,
And, though mine enemy, restored again
To all his lands and signories: when he's return'd,
Against Aumerle we will enforce his trial.

BISHOP OF CARLISLE:
That honourable day shall ne'er be seen.
Many a time hath banish'd Norfolk fought
For Jesu Christ in glorious Christian field,
Streaming the ensign of the Christian cross
Against black pagans, Turks, and Saracens:
And toil'd with works of war, retired himself
To Italy; and there at Venice gave
His body to that pleasant country's earth,
And his pure soul unto his captain Christ,
Under whose colours he had fought so long.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Why, bishop, is Norfolk dead?

BISHOP OF CARLISLE:
As surely as I live, my lord.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Sweet peace conduct his sweet soul to the bosom
Of good old Abraham! Lords appellants,
Your differences shall all rest under gage
Till we assign you to your days of trial.

DUKE OF YORK:
Great Duke of Lancaster, I come to thee
From plume-pluck'd Richard; who with willing soul
Adopts thee heir, and his high sceptre yields
To the possession of thy royal hand:
Ascend his throne, descending now from him;
And long live Henry, fourth of that name!

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
In God's name, I'll ascend the regal throne.

BISHOP OF CARLISLE:
Marry. God forbid!
Worst in this royal presence may I speak,
Yet best beseeming me to speak the truth.
Would God that any in this noble presence
Were enough noble to be upright judge
Of noble Richard! then true noblesse would
Learn him forbearance from so foul a wrong.
What subject can give sentence on his king?
And who sits here that is not Richard's subject?
Thieves are not judged but they are by to hear,
Although apparent guilt be seen in them;
And shall the figure of God's majesty,
His captain, steward, deputy-elect,
Anointed, crowned, planted many years,
Be judged by subject and inferior breath,
And he himself not present? O, forfend it, God,
That in a Christian climate souls refined
Should show so heinous, black, obscene a deed!
I speak to subjects, and a subject speaks,
Stirr'd up by God, thus boldly for his king:
My Lord of Hereford here, whom you call king,
Is a foul traitor to proud Hereford's king:
And if you crown him, let me prophesy:
The blood of English shall manure the ground,
And future ages groan for this foul act;
Peace shall go sleep with Turks and infidels,
And in this seat of peace tumultuous wars
Shall kin with kin and kind with kind confound;
Disorder, horror, fear and mutiny
Shall here inhabit, and this land be call'd
The field of Golgotha and dead men's skulls.
O, if you raise this house against this house,
It will the woefullest division prove
That ever fell upon this cursed earth.
Prevent it, resist it, let it not be so,
Lest child, child's children, cry against you woe!

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Well have you argued, sir; and, for your pains,
Of capital treason we arrest you here.
My Lord of Westminster, be it your charge
To keep him safely till his day of trial.
May it please you, lords, to grant the commons' suit.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Fetch hither Richard, that in common view
He may surrender; so we shall proceed
Without suspicion.

DUKE OF YORK:
I will be his conduct.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Lords, you that here are under our arrest,
Procure your sureties for your days of answer.
Little are we beholding to your love,
And little look'd for at your helping hands.

KING RICHARD II:
Alack, why am I sent for to a king,
Before I have shook off the regal thoughts
Wherewith I reign'd? I hardly yet have learn'd
To insinuate, flatter, bow, and bend my limbs:
Give sorrow leave awhile to tutor me
To this submission. Yet I well remember
The favours of these men: were they not mine?
Did they not sometime cry, 'all hail!' to me?
So Judas did to Christ: but he, in twelve,
Found truth in all but one: I, in twelve thousand, none.
God save the king! Will no man say amen?
Am I both priest and clerk? well then, amen.
God save the king! although I be not he;
And yet, amen, if heaven do think him me.
To do what service am I sent for hither?

DUKE OF YORK:
To do that office of thine own good will
Which tired majesty did make thee offer,
The resignation of thy state and crown
To Henry Bolingbroke.

KING RICHARD II:
Give me the crown. Here, cousin, seize the crown;
Here cousin:
On this side my hand, and on that side yours.
Now is this golden crown like a deep well
That owes two buckets, filling one another,
The emptier ever dancing in the air,
The other down, unseen and full of water:
That bucket down and full of tears am I,
Drinking my griefs, whilst you mount up on high.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
I thought you had been willing to resign.

KING RICHARD II:
My crown I am; but still my griefs are mine:
You may my glories and my state depose,
But not my griefs; still am I king of those.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Part of your cares you give me with your crown.

KING RICHARD II:
Your cares set up do not pluck my cares down.
My care is loss of care, by old care done;
Your care is gain of care, by new care won:
The cares I give I have, though given away;
They tend the crown, yet still with me they stay.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Are you contented to resign the crown?

KING RICHARD II:
Ay, no; no, ay; for I must nothing be;
Therefore no no, for I resign to thee.
Now mark me, how I will undo myself;
I give this heavy weight from off my head
And this unwieldy sceptre from my hand,
The pride of kingly sway from out my heart;
With mine own tears I wash away my balm,
With mine own hands I give away my crown,
With mine own tongue deny my sacred state,
With mine own breath release all duty's rites:
All pomp and majesty I do forswear;
My manors, rents, revenues I forego;
My acts, decrees, and statutes I deny:
God pardon all oaths that are broke to me!
God keep all vows unbroke that swear to thee!
Make me, that nothing have, with nothing grieved,
And thou with all pleased, that hast all achieved!
Long mayst thou live in Richard's seat to sit,
And soon lie Richard in an earthly pit!
God save King Harry, unking'd Richard says,
And send him many years of sunshine days!
What more remains?

NORTHUMBERLAND:
No more, but that you read
These accusations and these grievous crimes
Committed by your person and your followers
Against the state and profit of this land;
That, by confessing them, the souls of men
May deem that you are worthily deposed.

KING RICHARD II:
Must I do so? and must I ravel out
My weaved-up folly? Gentle Northumberland,
If thy offences were upon record,
Would it not shame thee in so fair a troop
To read a lecture of them? If thou wouldst,
There shouldst thou find one heinous article,
Containing the deposing of a king
And cracking the strong warrant of an oath,
Mark'd with a blot, damn'd in the book of heaven:
Nay, all of you that stand and look upon,
Whilst that my wretchedness doth bait myself,
Though some of you with Pilate wash your hands
Showing an outward pity; yet you Pilates
Have here deliver'd me to my sour cross,
And water cannot wash away your sin.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
My lord, dispatch; read o'er these articles.

KING RICHARD II:
Mine eyes are full of tears, I cannot see:
And yet salt water blinds them not so much
But they can see a sort of traitors here.
Nay, if I turn mine eyes upon myself,
I find myself a traitor with the rest;
For I have given here my soul's consent
To undeck the pompous body of a king;
Made glory base and sovereignty a slave,
Proud majesty a subject, state a peasant.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
My lord,--

KING RICHARD II:
No lord of thine, thou haught insulting man,
Nor no man's lord; I have no name, no title,
No, not that name was given me at the font,
But 'tis usurp'd: alack the heavy day,
That I have worn so many winters out,
And know not now what name to call myself!
O that I were a mockery king of snow,
Standing before the sun of Bolingbroke,
To melt myself away in water-drops!
Good king, great king, and yet not greatly good,
An if my word be sterling yet in England,
Let it command a mirror hither straight,
That it may show me what a face I have,
Since it is bankrupt of his majesty.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Go some of you and fetch a looking-glass.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Read o'er this paper while the glass doth come.

KING RICHARD II:
Fiend, thou torment'st me ere I come to hell!

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Urge it no more, my Lord Northumberland.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
The commons will not then be satisfied.

KING RICHARD II:
They shall be satisfied: I'll read enough,
When I do see the very book indeed
Where all my sins are writ, and that's myself.
Give me the glass, and therein will I read.
No deeper wrinkles yet? hath sorrow struck
So many blows upon this face of mine,
And made no deeper wounds? O flattering glass,
Like to my followers in prosperity,
Thou dost beguile me! Was this face the face
That every day under his household roof
Did keep ten thousand men? was this the face
That, like the sun, did make beholders wink?
Was this the face that faced so many follies,
And was at last out-faced by Bolingbroke?
A brittle glory shineth in this face:
As brittle as the glory is the face;
For there it is, crack'd in a hundred shivers.
Mark, silent king, the moral of this sport,
How soon my sorrow hath destroy'd my face.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
The shadow of your sorrow hath destroy'd
The shadow or your face.

KING RICHARD II:
Say that again.
The shadow of my sorrow! ha! let's see:
'Tis very true, my grief lies all within;
And these external manners of laments
Are merely shadows to the unseen grief
That swells with silence in the tortured soul;
There lies the substance: and I thank thee, king,
For thy great bounty, that not only givest
Me cause to wail but teachest me the way
How to lament the cause. I'll beg one boon,
And then be gone and trouble you no more.
Shall I obtain it?

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Name it, fair cousin.

KING RICHARD II:
'Fair cousin'? I am greater than a king:
For when I was a king, my flatterers
Were then but subjects; being now a subject,
I have a king here to my flatterer.
Being so great, I have no need to beg.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Yet ask.

KING RICHARD II:
And shall I have?

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
You shall.

KING RICHARD II:
Then give me leave to go.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Whither?

KING RICHARD II:
Whither you will, so I were from your sights.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Go, some of you convey him to the Tower.

KING RICHARD II:
O, good! convey? conveyers are you all,
That rise thus nimbly by a true king's fall.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
On Wednesday next we solemnly set down
Our coronation: lords, prepare yourselves.

Abbot:
A woeful pageant have we here beheld.

BISHOP OF CARLISLE:
The woe's to come; the children yet unborn.
Shall feel this day as sharp to them as thorn.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
You holy clergymen, is there no plot
To rid the realm of this pernicious blot?

Abbot:
My lord,
Before I freely speak my mind herein,
You shall not only take the sacrament
To bury mine intents, but also to effect
Whatever I shall happen to devise.
I see your brows are full of discontent,
Your hearts of sorrow and your eyes of tears:
Come home with me to supper; and I'll lay
A plot shall show us all a merry day.

QUEEN:
This way the king will come; this is the way
To Julius Caesar's ill-erected tower,
To whose flint bosom my condemned lord
Is doom'd a prisoner by proud Bolingbroke:
Here let us rest, if this rebellious earth
Have any resting for her true king's queen.
But soft, but see, or rather do not see,
My fair rose wither: yet look up, behold,
That you in pity may dissolve to dew,
And wash him fresh again with true-love tears.
Ah, thou, the model where old Troy did stand,
Thou map of honour, thou King Richard's tomb,
And not King Richard; thou most beauteous inn,
Why should hard-favour'd grief be lodged in thee,
When triumph is become an alehouse guest?

KING RICHARD II:
Join not with grief, fair woman, do not so,
To make my end too sudden: learn, good soul,
To think our former state a happy dream;
From which awaked, the truth of what we are
Shows us but this: I am sworn brother, sweet,
To grim Necessity, and he and I
Will keep a league till death. Hie thee to France
And cloister thee in some religious house:
Our holy lives must win a new world's crown,
Which our profane hours here have stricken down.

QUEEN:
What, is my Richard both in shape and mind
Transform'd and weaken'd? hath Bolingbroke deposed
Thine intellect? hath he been in thy heart?
The lion dying thrusteth forth his paw,
And wounds the earth, if nothing else, with rage
To be o'erpower'd; and wilt thou, pupil-like,
Take thy correction mildly, kiss the rod,
And fawn on rage with base humility,
Which art a lion and a king of beasts?

KING RICHARD II:
A king of beasts, indeed; if aught but beasts,
I had been still a happy king of men.
Good sometime queen, prepare thee hence for France:
Think I am dead and that even here thou takest,
As from my death-bed, thy last living leave.
In winter's tedious nights sit by the fire
With good old folks and let them tell thee tales
Of woeful ages long ago betid;
And ere thou bid good night, to quit their griefs,
Tell thou the lamentable tale of me
And send the hearers weeping to their beds:
For why, the senseless brands will sympathize
The heavy accent of thy moving tongue
And in compassion weep the fire out;
And some will mourn in ashes, some coal-black,
For the deposing of a rightful king.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
My lord, the mind of Bolingbroke is changed:
You must to Pomfret, not unto the Tower.
And, madam, there is order ta'en for you;
With all swift speed you must away to France.

KING RICHARD II:
Northumberland, thou ladder wherewithal
The mounting Bolingbroke ascends my throne,
The time shall not be many hours of age
More than it is ere foul sin gathering head
Shalt break into corruption: thou shalt think,
Though he divide the realm and give thee half,
It is too little, helping him to all;
And he shall think that thou, which know'st the way
To plant unrightful kings, wilt know again,
Being ne'er so little urged, another way
To pluck him headlong from the usurped throne.
The love of wicked men converts to fear;
That fear to hate, and hate turns one or both
To worthy danger and deserved death.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
My guilt be on my head, and there an end.
Take leave and part; for you must part forthwith.

KING RICHARD II:
Doubly divorced! Bad men, you violate
A twofold marriage, 'twixt my crown and me,
And then betwixt me and my married wife.
Let me unkiss the oath 'twixt thee and me;
And yet not so, for with a kiss 'twas made.
Part us, Northumberland; I toward the north,
Where shivering cold and sickness pines the clime;
My wife to France: from whence, set forth in pomp,
She came adorned hither like sweet May,
Sent back like Hallowmas or short'st of day.

QUEEN:
And must we be divided? must we part?

KING RICHARD II:
Ay, hand from hand, my love, and heart from heart.

QUEEN:
Banish us both and send the king with me.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
That were some love but little policy.

QUEEN:
Then whither he goes, thither let me go.

KING RICHARD II:
So two, together weeping, make one woe.
Weep thou for me in France, I for thee here;
Better far off than near, be ne'er the near.
Go, count thy way with sighs; I mine with groans.

QUEEN:
So longest way shall have the longest moans.

KING RICHARD II:
Twice for one step I'll groan, the way being short,
And piece the way out with a heavy heart.
Come, come, in wooing sorrow let's be brief,
Since, wedding it, there is such length in grief;
One kiss shall stop our mouths, and dumbly part;
Thus give I mine, and thus take I thy heart.

QUEEN:
Give me mine own again; 'twere no good part
To take on me to keep and kill thy heart.
So, now I have mine own again, be gone,
That I might strive to kill it with a groan.

KING RICHARD II:
We make woe wanton with this fond delay:
Once more, adieu; the rest let sorrow say.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
My lord, you told me you would tell the rest,
When weeping made you break the story off,
of our two cousins coming into London.

DUKE OF YORK:
Where did I leave?

DUCHESS OF YORK:
At that sad stop, my lord,
Where rude misgovern'd hands from windows' tops
Threw dust and rubbish on King Richard's head.

DUKE OF YORK:
Then, as I said, the duke, great Bolingbroke,
Mounted upon a hot and fiery steed
Which his aspiring rider seem'd to know,
With slow but stately pace kept on his course,
Whilst all tongues cried 'God save thee,
Bolingbroke!'
You would have thought the very windows spake,
So many greedy looks of young and old
Through casements darted their desiring eyes
Upon his visage, and that all the walls
With painted imagery had said at once
'Jesu preserve thee! welcome, Bolingbroke!'
Whilst he, from the one side to the other turning,
Bareheaded, lower than his proud steed's neck,
Bespake them thus: 'I thank you, countrymen:'
And thus still doing, thus he pass'd along.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Alack, poor Richard! where rode he the whilst?

DUKE OF YORK:
As in a theatre, the eyes of men,
After a well-graced actor leaves the stage,
Are idly bent on him that enters next,
Thinking his prattle to be tedious;
Even so, or with much more contempt, men's eyes
Did scowl on gentle Richard; no man cried 'God save him!'
No joyful tongue gave him his welcome home:
But dust was thrown upon his sacred head:
Which with such gentle sorrow he shook off,
His face still combating with tears and smiles,
The badges of his grief and patience,
That had not God, for some strong purpose, steel'd
The hearts of men, they must perforce have melted
And barbarism itself have pitied him.
But heaven hath a hand in these events,
To whose high will we bound our calm contents.
To Bolingbroke are we sworn subjects now,
Whose state and honour I for aye allow.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Here comes my son Aumerle.

DUKE OF YORK:
Aumerle that was;
But that is lost for being Richard's friend,
And, madam, you must call him Rutland now:
I am in parliament pledge for his truth
And lasting fealty to the new-made king.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Welcome, my son: who are the violets now
That strew the green lap of the new come spring?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Madam, I know not, nor I greatly care not:
God knows I had as lief be none as one.

DUKE OF YORK:
Well, bear you well in this new spring of time,
Lest you be cropp'd before you come to prime.
What news from Oxford? hold those justs and triumphs?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
For aught I know, my lord, they do.

DUKE OF YORK:
You will be there, I know.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
If God prevent not, I purpose so.

DUKE OF YORK:
What seal is that, that hangs without thy bosom?
Yea, look'st thou pale? let me see the writing.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
My lord, 'tis nothing.

DUKE OF YORK:
No matter, then, who see it;
I will be satisfied; let me see the writing.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
I do beseech your grace to pardon me:
It is a matter of small consequence,
Which for some reasons I would not have seen.

DUKE OF YORK:
Which for some reasons, sir, I mean to see.
I fear, I fear,--

DUCHESS OF YORK:
What should you fear?
'Tis nothing but some bond, that he is enter'd into
For gay apparel 'gainst the triumph day.

DUKE OF YORK:
Bound to himself! what doth he with a bond
That he is bound to? Wife, thou art a fool.
Boy, let me see the writing.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
I do beseech you, pardon me; I may not show it.

DUKE OF YORK:
I will be satisfied; let me see it, I say.
Treason! foul treason! Villain! traitor! slave!

DUCHESS OF YORK:
What is the matter, my lord?

DUKE OF YORK:
Ho! who is within there?
Saddle my horse.
God for his mercy, what treachery is here!

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Why, what is it, my lord?

DUKE OF YORK:
Give me my boots, I say; saddle my horse.
Now, by mine honour, by my life, by my troth,
I will appeach the villain.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
What is the matter?

DUKE OF YORK:
Peace, foolish woman.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
I will not peace. What is the matter, Aumerle.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Good mother, be content; it is no more
Than my poor life must answer.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Thy life answer!

DUKE OF YORK:
Bring me my boots: I will unto the king.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Strike him, Aumerle. Poor boy, thou art amazed.
Hence, villain! never more come in my sight.

DUKE OF YORK:
Give me my boots, I say.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Why, York, what wilt thou do?
Wilt thou not hide the trespass of thine own?
Have we more sons? or are we like to have?
Is not my teeming date drunk up with time?
And wilt thou pluck my fair son from mine age,
And rob me of a happy mother's name?
Is he not like thee? is he not thine own?

DUKE OF YORK:
Thou fond mad woman,
Wilt thou conceal this dark conspiracy?
A dozen of them here have ta'en the sacrament,
And interchangeably set down their hands,
To kill the king at Oxford.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
He shall be none;
We'll keep him here: then what is that to him?

DUKE OF YORK:
Away, fond woman! were he twenty times my son,
I would appeach him.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Hadst thou groan'd for him
As I have done, thou wouldst be more pitiful.
But now I know thy mind; thou dost suspect
That I have been disloyal to thy bed,
And that he is a bastard, not thy son:
Sweet York, sweet husband, be not of that mind:
He is as like thee as a man may be,
Not like to me, or any of my kin,
And yet I love him.

DUKE OF YORK:
Make way, unruly woman!

DUCHESS OF YORK:
After, Aumerle! mount thee upon his horse;
Spur post, and get before him to the king,
And beg thy pardon ere he do accuse thee.
I'll not be long behind; though I be old,
I doubt not but to ride as fast as York:
And never will I rise up from the ground
Till Bolingbroke have pardon'd thee. Away, be gone!

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Can no man tell me of my unthrifty son?
'Tis full three months since I did see him last;
If any plague hang over us, 'tis he.
I would to God, my lords, he might be found:
Inquire at London, 'mongst the taverns there,
For there, they say, he daily doth frequent,
With unrestrained loose companions,
Even such, they say, as stand in narrow lanes,
And beat our watch, and rob our passengers;
Which he, young wanton and effeminate boy,
Takes on the point of honour to support
So dissolute a crew.

HENRY PERCY:
My lord, some two days since I saw the prince,
And told him of those triumphs held at Oxford.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
And what said the gallant?

HENRY PERCY:
His answer was, he would unto the stews,
And from the common'st creature pluck a glove,
And wear it as a favour; and with that
He would unhorse the lustiest challenger.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
As dissolute as desperate; yet through both
I see some sparks of better hope, which elder years
May happily bring forth. But who comes here?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Where is the king?

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
What means our cousin, that he stares and looks
So wildly?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
God save your grace! I do beseech your majesty,
To have some conference with your grace alone.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Withdraw yourselves, and leave us here alone.
What is the matter with our cousin now?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
For ever may my knees grow to the earth,
My tongue cleave to my roof within my mouth
Unless a pardon ere I rise or speak.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Intended or committed was this fault?
If on the first, how heinous e'er it be,
To win thy after-love I pardon thee.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Then give me leave that I may turn the key,
That no man enter till my tale be done.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Have thy desire.

DUKE OF YORK:

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Villain, I'll make thee safe.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Stay thy revengeful hand; thou hast no cause to fear.

DUKE OF YORK:

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
What is the matter, uncle? speak;
Recover breath; tell us how near is danger,
That we may arm us to encounter it.

DUKE OF YORK:
Peruse this writing here, and thou shalt know
The treason that my haste forbids me show.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Remember, as thou read'st, thy promise pass'd:
I do repent me; read not my name there
My heart is not confederate with my hand.

DUKE OF YORK:
It was, villain, ere thy hand did set it down.
I tore it from the traitor's bosom, king;
Fear, and not love, begets his penitence:
Forget to pity him, lest thy pity prove
A serpent that will sting thee to the heart.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
O heinous, strong and bold conspiracy!
O loyal father of a treacherous son!
Thou sheer, immaculate and silver fountain,
From when this stream through muddy passages
Hath held his current and defiled himself!
Thy overflow of good converts to bad,
And thy abundant goodness shall excuse
This deadly blot in thy digressing son.

DUKE OF YORK:
So shall my virtue be his vice's bawd;
And he shall spend mine honour with his shame,
As thriftless sons their scraping fathers' gold.
Mine honour lives when his dishonour dies,
Or my shamed life in his dishonour lies:
Thou kill'st me in his life; giving him breath,
The traitor lives, the true man's put to death.

DUCHESS OF YORK:

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
What shrill-voiced suppliant makes this eager cry?

DUCHESS OF YORK:
A woman, and thy aunt, great king; 'tis I.
Speak with me, pity me, open the door.
A beggar begs that never begg'd before.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Our scene is alter'd from a serious thing,
And now changed to 'The Beggar and the King.'
My dangerous cousin, let your mother in:
I know she is come to pray for your foul sin.

DUKE OF YORK:
If thou do pardon, whosoever pray,
More sins for this forgiveness prosper may.
This fester'd joint cut off, the rest rest sound;
This let alone will all the rest confound.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
O king, believe not this hard-hearted man!
Love loving not itself none other can.

DUKE OF YORK:
Thou frantic woman, what dost thou make here?
Shall thy old dugs once more a traitor rear?

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Sweet York, be patient. Hear me, gentle liege.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Rise up, good aunt.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Not yet, I thee beseech:
For ever will I walk upon my knees,
And never see day that the happy sees,
Till thou give joy; until thou bid me joy,
By pardoning Rutland, my transgressing boy.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Unto my mother's prayers I bend my knee.

DUKE OF YORK:
Against them both my true joints bended be.
Ill mayst thou thrive, if thou grant any grace!

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Pleads he in earnest? look upon his face;
His eyes do drop no tears, his prayers are in jest;
His words come from his mouth, ours from our breast:
He prays but faintly and would be denied;
We pray with heart and soul and all beside:
His weary joints would gladly rise, I know;
Our knees shall kneel till to the ground they grow:
His prayers are full of false hypocrisy;
Ours of true zeal and deep integrity.
Our prayers do out-pray his; then let them have
That mercy which true prayer ought to have.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Good aunt, stand up.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Nay, do not say, 'stand up;'
Say, 'pardon' first, and afterwards 'stand up.'
And if I were thy nurse, thy tongue to teach,
'Pardon' should be the first word of thy speech.
I never long'd to hear a word till now;
Say 'pardon,' king; let pity teach thee how:
The word is short, but not so short as sweet;
No word like 'pardon' for kings' mouths so meet.

DUKE OF YORK:
Speak it in French, king; say, 'pardonne moi.'

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Dost thou teach pardon pardon to destroy?
Ah, my sour husband, my hard-hearted lord,
That set'st the word itself against the word!
Speak 'pardon' as 'tis current in our land;
The chopping French we do not understand.
Thine eye begins to speak; set thy tongue there;
Or in thy piteous heart plant thou thine ear;
That hearing how our plaints and prayers do pierce,
Pity may move thee 'pardon' to rehearse.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Good aunt, stand up.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
I do not sue to stand;
Pardon is all the suit I have in hand.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
I pardon him, as God shall pardon me.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
O happy vantage of a kneeling knee!
Yet am I sick for fear: speak it again;
Twice saying 'pardon' doth not pardon twain,
But makes one pardon strong.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
With all my heart
I pardon him.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
A god on earth thou art.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
But for our trusty brother-in-law and the abbot,
With all the rest of that consorted crew,
Destruction straight shall dog them at the heels.
Good uncle, help to order several powers
To Oxford, or where'er these traitors are:
They shall not live within this world, I swear,
But I will have them, if I once know where.
Uncle, farewell: and, cousin too, adieu:
Your mother well hath pray'd, and prove you true.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Come, my old son: I pray God make thee new.

EXTON:
Didst thou not mark the king, what words he spake,
'Have I no friend will rid me of this living fear?'
Was it not so?

Servant:
These were his very words.

EXTON:
'Have I no friend?' quoth he: he spake it twice,
And urged it twice together, did he not?

Servant:
He did.

EXTON:
And speaking it, he wistly look'd on me,
And who should say, 'I would thou wert the man'
That would divorce this terror from my heart;'
Meaning the king at Pomfret. Come, let's go:
I am the king's friend, and will rid his foe.

KING RICHARD II:
I have been studying how I may compare
This prison where I live unto the world:
And for because the world is populous
And here is not a creature but myself,
I cannot do it; yet I'll hammer it out.
My brain I'll prove the female to my soul,
My soul the father; and these two beget
A generation of still-breeding thoughts,
And these same thoughts people this little world,
In humours like the people of this world,
For no thought is contented. The better sort,
As thoughts of things divine, are intermix'd
With scruples and do set the word itself
Against the word:
As thus, 'Come, little ones,' and then again,
'It is as hard to come as for a camel
To thread the postern of a small needle's eye.'
Thoughts tending to ambition, they do plot
Unlikely wonders; how these vain weak nails
May tear a passage through the flinty ribs
Of this hard world, my ragged prison walls,
And, for they cannot, die in their own pride.
Thoughts tending to content flatter themselves
That they are not the first of fortune's slaves,
Nor shall not be the last; like silly beggars
Who sitting in the stocks refuge their shame,
That many have and others must sit there;
And in this thought they find a kind of ease,
Bearing their own misfortunes on the back
Of such as have before endured the like.
Thus play I in one person many people,
And none contented: sometimes am I king;
Then treasons make me wish myself a beggar,
And so I am: then crushing penury
Persuades me I was better when a king;
Then am I king'd again: and by and by
Think that I am unking'd by Bolingbroke,
And straight am nothing: but whate'er I be,
Nor I nor any man that but man is
With nothing shall be pleased, till he be eased
With being nothing. Music do I hear?
Ha, ha! keep time: how sour sweet music is,
When time is broke and no proportion kept!
So is it in the music of men's lives.
And here have I the daintiness of ear
To cheque time broke in a disorder'd string;
But for the concord of my state and time
Had not an ear to hear my true time broke.
I wasted time, and now doth time waste me;
For now hath time made me his numbering clock:
My thoughts are minutes; and with sighs they jar
Their watches on unto mine eyes, the outward watch,
Whereto my finger, like a dial's point,
Is pointing still, in cleansing them from tears.
Now sir, the sound that tells what hour it is
Are clamorous groans, which strike upon my heart,
Which is the bell: so sighs and tears and groans
Show minutes, times, and hours: but my time
Runs posting on in Bolingbroke's proud joy,
While I stand fooling here, his Jack o' the clock.
This music mads me; let it sound no more;
For though it have holp madmen to their wits,
In me it seems it will make wise men mad.
Yet blessing on his heart that gives it me!
For 'tis a sign of love; and love to Richard
Is a strange brooch in this all-hating world.

Groom:
Hail, royal prince!

KING RICHARD II:
Thanks, noble peer;
The cheapest of us is ten groats too dear.
What art thou? and how comest thou hither,
Where no man never comes but that sad dog
That brings me food to make misfortune live?

Groom:
I was a poor groom of thy stable, king,
When thou wert king; who, travelling towards York,
With much ado at length have gotten leave
To look upon my sometimes royal master's face.
O, how it yearn'd my heart when I beheld
In London streets, that coronation-day,
When Bolingbroke rode on roan Barbary,
That horse that thou so often hast bestrid,
That horse that I so carefully have dress'd!

KING RICHARD II:
Rode he on Barbary? Tell me, gentle friend,
How went he under him?

Groom:
So proudly as if he disdain'd the ground.

KING RICHARD II:
So proud that Bolingbroke was on his back!
That jade hath eat bread from my royal hand;
This hand hath made him proud with clapping him.
Would he not stumble? would he not fall down,
Since pride must have a fall, and break the neck
Of that proud man that did usurp his back?
Forgiveness, horse! why do I rail on thee,
Since thou, created to be awed by man,
Wast born to bear? I was not made a horse;
And yet I bear a burthen like an ass,
Spurr'd, gall'd and tired by jouncing Bolingbroke.

Keeper:
Fellow, give place; here is no longer stay.

KING RICHARD II:
If thou love me, 'tis time thou wert away.

Groom:
What my tongue dares not, that my heart shall say.

Keeper:
My lord, will't please you to fall to?

KING RICHARD II:
Taste of it first, as thou art wont to do.

Keeper:
My lord, I dare not: Sir Pierce of Exton, who
lately came from the king, commands the contrary.

KING RICHARD II:
The devil take Henry of Lancaster and thee!
Patience is stale, and I am weary of it.

Keeper:
Help, help, help!

KING RICHARD II:
How now! what means death in this rude assault?
Villain, thy own hand yields thy death's instrument.
Go thou, and fill another room in hell.
That hand shall burn in never-quenching fire
That staggers thus my person. Exton, thy fierce hand
Hath with the king's blood stain'd the king's own land.
Mount, mount, my soul! thy seat is up on high;
Whilst my gross flesh sinks downward, here to die.

EXTON:
As full of valour as of royal blood:
Both have I spill'd; O would the deed were good!
For now the devil, that told me I did well,
Says that this deed is chronicled in hell.
This dead king to the living king I'll bear
Take hence the rest, and give them burial here.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Kind uncle York, the latest news we hear
Is that the rebels have consumed with fire
Our town of Cicester in Gloucestershire;
But whether they be ta'en or slain we hear not.
Welcome, my lord what is the news?

NORTHUMBERLAND:
First, to thy sacred state wish I all happiness.
The next news is, I have to London sent
The heads of Oxford, Salisbury, Blunt, and Kent:
The manner of their taking may appear
At large discoursed in this paper here.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
We thank thee, gentle Percy, for thy pains;
And to thy worth will add right worthy gains.

LORD FITZWATER:
My lord, I have from Oxford sent to London
The heads of Brocas and Sir Bennet Seely,
Two of the dangerous consorted traitors
That sought at Oxford thy dire overthrow.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Thy pains, Fitzwater, shall not be forgot;
Right noble is thy merit, well I wot.

HENRY PERCY:
The grand conspirator, Abbot of Westminster,
With clog of conscience and sour melancholy
Hath yielded up his body to the grave;
But here is Carlisle living, to abide
Thy kingly doom and sentence of his pride.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Carlisle, this is your doom:
Choose out some secret place, some reverend room,
More than thou hast, and with it joy thy life;
So as thou livest in peace, die free from strife:
For though mine enemy thou hast ever been,
High sparks of honour in thee have I seen.

EXTON:
Great king, within this coffin I present
Thy buried fear: herein all breathless lies
The mightiest of thy greatest enemies,
Richard of Bordeaux, by me hither brought.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Exton, I thank thee not; for thou hast wrought
A deed of slander with thy fatal hand
Upon my head and all this famous land.

EXTON:
From your own mouth, my lord, did I this deed.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
They love not poison that do poison need,
Nor do I thee: though I did wish him dead,
I hate the murderer, love him murdered.
The guilt of conscience take thou for thy labour,
But neither my good word nor princely favour:
With Cain go wander through shades of night,
And never show thy head by day nor light.
Lords, I protest, my soul is full of woe,
That blood should sprinkle me to make me grow:
Come, mourn with me for that I do lament,
And put on sullen black incontinent:
I'll make a voyage to the Holy Land,
To wash this blood off from my guilty hand:
March sadly after; grace my mournings here;
In weeping after this untimely bier.


SAMPSON:
Gregory, o' my word, we'll not carry coals.

GREGORY:
No, for then we should be colliers.

SAMPSON:
I mean, an we be in choler, we'll draw.

GREGORY:
Ay, while you live, draw your neck out o' the collar.

SAMPSON:
I strike quickly, being moved.

GREGORY:
But thou art not quickly moved to strike.

SAMPSON:
A dog of the house of Montague moves me.

GREGORY:
To move is to stir; and to be valiant is to stand:
therefore, if thou art moved, thou runn'st away.

SAMPSON:
A dog of that house shall move me to stand: I will
take the wall of any man or maid of Montague's.

GREGORY:
That shows thee a weak slave; for the weakest goes
to the wall.

SAMPSON:
True; and therefore women, being the weaker vessels,
are ever thrust to the wall: therefore I will push
Montague's men from the wall, and thrust his maids
to the wall.

GREGORY:
The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.

SAMPSON:
'Tis all one, I will show myself a tyrant: when I
have fought with the men, I will be cruel with the
maids, and cut off their heads.

GREGORY:
The heads of the maids?

SAMPSON:
Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads;
take it in what sense thou wilt.

GREGORY:
They must take it in sense that feel it.

SAMPSON:
Me they shall feel while I am able to stand: and
'tis known I am a pretty piece of flesh.

GREGORY:
'Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou
hadst been poor John. Draw thy tool! here comes
two of the house of the Montagues.

SAMPSON:
My naked weapon is out: quarrel, I will back thee.

GREGORY:
How! turn thy back and run?

SAMPSON:
Fear me not.

GREGORY:
No, marry; I fear thee!

SAMPSON:
Let us take the law of our sides; let them begin.

GREGORY:
I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as
they list.

SAMPSON:
Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them;
which is a disgrace to them, if they bear it.

ABRAHAM:
Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?

SAMPSON:
I do bite my thumb, sir.

ABRAHAM:
Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?

SAMPSON:

GREGORY:
No.

SAMPSON:
No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir, but I
bite my thumb, sir.

GREGORY:
Do you quarrel, sir?

ABRAHAM:
Quarrel sir! no, sir.

SAMPSON:
If you do, sir, I am for you: I serve as good a man as you.

ABRAHAM:
No better.

SAMPSON:
Well, sir.

GREGORY:
Say 'better:' here comes one of my master's kinsmen.

SAMPSON:
Yes, better, sir.

ABRAHAM:
You lie.

SAMPSON:
Draw, if you be men. Gregory, remember thy swashing blow.

BENVOLIO:
Part, fools!
Put up your swords; you know not what you do.

TYBALT:
What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
Turn thee, Benvolio, look upon thy death.

BENVOLIO:
I do but keep the peace: put up thy sword,
Or manage it to part these men with me.

TYBALT:
What, drawn, and talk of peace! I hate the word,
As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee:
Have at thee, coward!

First Citizen:
Clubs, bills, and partisans! strike! beat them down!
Down with the Capulets! down with the Montagues!

CAPULET:
What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!

LADY CAPULET:
A crutch, a crutch! why call you for a sword?

CAPULET:
My sword, I say! Old Montague is come,
And flourishes his blade in spite of me.

MONTAGUE:
Thou villain Capulet,--Hold me not, let me go.

LADY MONTAGUE:
Thou shalt not stir a foot to seek a foe.

PRINCE:
Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
Profaners of this neighbour-stained steel,--
Will they not hear? What, ho! you men, you beasts,
That quench the fire of your pernicious rage
With purple fountains issuing from your veins,
On pain of torture, from those bloody hands
Throw your mistemper'd weapons to the ground,
And hear the sentence of your moved prince.
Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word,
By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
Have thrice disturb'd the quiet of our streets,
And made Verona's ancient citizens
Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments,
To wield old partisans, in hands as old,
Canker'd with peace, to part your canker'd hate:
If ever you disturb our streets again,
Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
For this time, all the rest depart away:
You Capulet; shall go along with me:
And, Montague, come you this afternoon,
To know our further pleasure in this case,
To old Free-town, our common judgment-place.
Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.

MONTAGUE:
Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?

BENVOLIO:
Here were the servants of your adversary,
And yours, close fighting ere I did approach:
I drew to part them: in the instant came
The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepared,
Which, as he breathed defiance to my ears,
He swung about his head and cut the winds,
Who nothing hurt withal hiss'd him in scorn:
While we were interchanging thrusts and blows,
Came more and more and fought on part and part,
Till the prince came, who parted either part.

LADY MONTAGUE:
O, where is Romeo? saw you him to-day?
Right glad I am he was not at this fray.

BENVOLIO:
Madam, an hour before the worshipp'd sun
Peer'd forth the golden window of the east,
A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad;
Where, underneath the grove of sycamore
That westward rooteth from the city's side,
So early walking did I see your son:
Towards him I made, but he was ware of me
And stole into the covert of the wood:
I, measuring his affections by my own,
That most are busied when they're most alone,
Pursued my humour not pursuing his,
And gladly shunn'd who gladly fled from me.

MONTAGUE:
Many a morning hath he there been seen,
With tears augmenting the fresh morning dew.
Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs;
But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
Should in the furthest east begin to draw
The shady curtains from Aurora's bed,
Away from the light steals home my heavy son,
And private in his chamber pens himself,
Shuts up his windows, locks far daylight out
And makes himself an artificial night:
Black and portentous must this humour prove,
Unless good counsel may the cause remove.

BENVOLIO:
My noble uncle, do you know the cause?

MONTAGUE:
I neither know it nor can learn of him.

BENVOLIO:
Have you importuned him by any means?

MONTAGUE:
Both by myself and many other friends:
But he, his own affections' counsellor,
Is to himself--I will not say how true--
But to himself so secret and so close,
So far from sounding and discovery,
As is the bud bit with an envious worm,
Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air,
Or dedicate his beauty to the sun.
Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow.
We would as willingly give cure as know.

BENVOLIO:
See, where he comes: so please you, step aside;
I'll know his grievance, or be much denied.

MONTAGUE:
I would thou wert so happy by thy stay,
To hear true shrift. Come, madam, let's away.

BENVOLIO:
Good-morrow, cousin.

ROMEO:
Is the day so young?

BENVOLIO:
But new struck nine.

ROMEO:
Ay me! sad hours seem long.
Was that my father that went hence so fast?

BENVOLIO:
It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?

ROMEO:
Not having that, which, having, makes them short.

BENVOLIO:
In love?

ROMEO:
Out--

BENVOLIO:
Of love?

ROMEO:
Out of her favour, where I am in love.

BENVOLIO:
Alas, that love, so gentle in his view,
Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!

ROMEO:
Alas, that love, whose view is muffled still,
Should, without eyes, see pathways to his will!
Where shall we dine? O me! What fray was here?
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
Here's much to do with hate, but more with love.
Why, then, O brawling love! O loving hate!
O any thing, of nothing first create!
O heavy lightness! serious vanity!
Mis-shapen chaos of well-seeming forms!
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire,
sick health!
Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is!
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
Dost thou not laugh?

BENVOLIO:
No, coz, I rather weep.

ROMEO:
Good heart, at what?

BENVOLIO:
At thy good heart's oppression.

ROMEO:
Why, such is love's transgression.
Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,
Which thou wilt propagate, to have it prest
With more of thine: this love that thou hast shown
Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.
Love is a smoke raised with the fume of sighs;
Being purged, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes;
Being vex'd a sea nourish'd with lovers' tears:
What is it else? a madness most discreet,
A choking gall and a preserving sweet.
Farewell, my coz.

BENVOLIO:
Soft! I will go along;
An if you leave me so, you do me wrong.

ROMEO:
Tut, I have lost myself; I am not here;
This is not Romeo, he's some other where.

BENVOLIO:
Tell me in sadness, who is that you love.

ROMEO:
What, shall I groan and tell thee?

BENVOLIO:
Groan! why, no.
But sadly tell me who.

ROMEO:
Bid a sick man in sadness make his will:
Ah, word ill urged to one that is so ill!
In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.

BENVOLIO:
I aim'd so near, when I supposed you loved.

ROMEO:
A right good mark-man! And she's fair I love.

BENVOLIO:
A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.

ROMEO:
Well, in that hit you miss: she'll not be hit
With Cupid's arrow; she hath Dian's wit;
And, in strong proof of chastity well arm'd,
From love's weak childish bow she lives unharm'd.
She will not stay the siege of loving terms,
Nor bide the encounter of assailing eyes,
Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold:
O, she is rich in beauty, only poor,
That when she dies with beauty dies her store.

BENVOLIO:
Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?

ROMEO:
She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste,
For beauty starved with her severity
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,
To merit bliss by making me despair:
She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow
Do I live dead that live to tell it now.


--- End of file: shakespear_08.txt ---


BENVOLIO:
Be ruled by me, forget to think of her.

ROMEO:
O, teach me how I should forget to think.

BENVOLIO:
By giving liberty unto thine eyes;
Examine other beauties.

ROMEO:
'Tis the way
To call hers exquisite, in question more:
These happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows
Being black put us in mind they hide the fair;
He that is strucken blind cannot forget
The precious treasure of his eyesight lost:
Show me a mistress that is passing fair,
What doth her beauty serve, but as a note
Where I may read who pass'd that passing fair?
Farewell: thou canst not teach me to forget.

BENVOLIO:
I'll pay that doctrine, or else die in debt.

CAPULET:
But Montague is bound as well as I,
In penalty alike; and 'tis not hard, I think,
For men so old as we to keep the peace.

PARIS:
Of honourable reckoning are you both;
And pity 'tis you lived at odds so long.
But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?

CAPULET:
But saying o'er what I have said before:
My child is yet a stranger in the world;
She hath not seen the change of fourteen years,
Let two more summers wither in their pride,
Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.

PARIS:
Younger than she are happy mothers made.

CAPULET:
And too soon marr'd are those so early made.
The earth hath swallow'd all my hopes but she,
She is the hopeful lady of my earth:
But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart,
My will to her consent is but a part;
An she agree, within her scope of choice
Lies my consent and fair according voice.
This night I hold an old accustom'd feast,
Whereto I have invited many a guest,
Such as I love; and you, among the store,
One more, most welcome, makes my number more.
At my poor house look to behold this night
Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light:
Such comfort as do lusty young men feel
When well-apparell'd April on the heel
Of limping winter treads, even such delight
Among fresh female buds shall you this night
Inherit at my house; hear all, all see,
And like her most whose merit most shall be:
Which on more view, of many mine being one
May stand in number, though in reckoning none,
Come, go with me.
Go, sirrah, trudge about
Through fair Verona; find those persons out
Whose names are written there, and to them say,
My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.

Servant:
Find them out whose names are written here! It is
written, that the shoemaker should meddle with his
yard, and the tailor with his last, the fisher with
his pencil, and the painter with his nets; but I am
sent to find those persons whose names are here
writ, and can never find what names the writing
person hath here writ. I must to the learned.--In good time.

BENVOLIO:
Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning,
One pain is lessen'd by another's anguish;
Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning;
One desperate grief cures with another's languish:
Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
And the rank poison of the old will die.

ROMEO:
Your plaintain-leaf is excellent for that.

BENVOLIO:
For what, I pray thee?

ROMEO:
For your broken shin.

BENVOLIO:
Why, Romeo, art thou mad?

ROMEO:
Not mad, but bound more than a mad-man is;
Shut up in prison, kept without my food,
Whipp'd and tormented and--God-den, good fellow.

Servant:
God gi' god-den. I pray, sir, can you read?

ROMEO:
Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.

Servant:
Perhaps you have learned it without book: but, I
pray, can you read any thing you see?

ROMEO:
Ay, if I know the letters and the language.

Servant:
Ye say honestly: rest you merry!

ROMEO:
Stay, fellow; I can read.
'Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;
County Anselme and his beauteous sisters; the lady
widow of Vitravio; Signior Placentio and his lovely
nieces; Mercutio and his brother Valentine; mine
uncle Capulet, his wife and daughters; my fair niece
Rosaline; Livia; Signior Valentio and his cousin
Tybalt, Lucio and the lively Helena.' A fair
assembly: whither should they come?

Servant:
Up.

ROMEO:
Whither?

Servant:
To supper; to our house.

ROMEO:
Whose house?

Servant:
My master's.

ROMEO:
Indeed, I should have ask'd you that before.

Servant:
Now I'll tell you without asking: my master is the
great rich Capulet; and if you be not of the house
of Montagues, I pray, come and crush a cup of wine.
Rest you merry!

BENVOLIO:
At this same ancient feast of Capulet's
Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lovest,
With all the admired beauties of Verona:
Go thither; and, with unattainted eye,
Compare her face with some that I shall show,
And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.

ROMEO:
When the devout religion of mine eye
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires;
And these, who often drown'd could never die,
Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars!
One fairer than my love! the all-seeing sun
Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.

BENVOLIO:
Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by,
Herself poised with herself in either eye:
But in that crystal scales let there be weigh'd
Your lady's love against some other maid
That I will show you shining at this feast,
And she shall scant show well that now shows best.

ROMEO:
I'll go along, no such sight to be shown,
But to rejoice in splendor of mine own.

LADY CAPULET:
Nurse, where's my daughter? call her forth to me.

Nurse:
Now, by my maidenhead, at twelve year old,
I bade her come. What, lamb! what, ladybird!
God forbid! Where's this girl? What, Juliet!

JULIET:
How now! who calls?

Nurse:
Your mother.

JULIET:
Madam, I am here.
What is your will?

LADY CAPULET:
This is the matter:--Nurse, give leave awhile,
We must talk in secret:--nurse, come back again;
I have remember'd me, thou's hear our counsel.
Thou know'st my daughter's of a pretty age.

Nurse:
Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.

LADY CAPULET:
She's not fourteen.

Nurse:
I'll lay fourteen of my teeth,--
And yet, to my teeth be it spoken, I have but four--
She is not fourteen. How long is it now
To Lammas-tide?

LADY CAPULET:
A fortnight and odd days.

Nurse:
Even or odd, of all days in the year,
Come Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen.
Susan and she--God rest all Christian souls!--
Were of an age: well, Susan is with God;
She was too good for me: but, as I said,
On Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen;
That shall she, marry; I remember it well.
'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years;
And she was wean'd,--I never shall forget it,--
Of all the days of the year, upon that day:
For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,
Sitting in the sun under the dove-house wall;
My lord and you were then at Mantua:--
Nay, I do bear a brain:--but, as I said,
When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,
To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug!
Shake quoth the dove-house: 'twas no need, I trow,
To bid me trudge:
And since that time it is eleven years;
For then she could stand alone; nay, by the rood,
She could have run and waddled all about;
For even the day before, she broke her brow:
And then my husband--God be with his soul!
A' was a merry man--took up the child:
'Yea,' quoth he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit;
Wilt thou not, Jule?' and, by my holidame,
The pretty wretch left crying and said 'Ay.'
To see, now, how a jest shall come about!
I warrant, an I should live a thousand years,
I never should forget it: 'Wilt thou not, Jule?' quoth he;
And, pretty fool, it stinted and said 'Ay.'

LADY CAPULET:
Enough of this; I pray thee, hold thy peace.

Nurse:
Yes, madam: yet I cannot choose but laugh,
To think it should leave crying and say 'Ay.'
And yet, I warrant, it had upon its brow
A bump as big as a young cockerel's stone;
A parlous knock; and it cried bitterly:
'Yea,' quoth my husband,'fall'st upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age;
Wilt thou not, Jule?' it stinted and said 'Ay.'

JULIET:
And stint thou too, I pray thee, nurse, say I.

Nurse:
Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace!
Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nursed:
An I might live to see thee married once,
I have my wish.

LADY CAPULET:
Marry, that 'marry' is the very theme
I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,
How stands your disposition to be married?

JULIET:
It is an honour that I dream not of.

Nurse:
An honour! were not I thine only nurse,
I would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat.

LADY CAPULET:
Well, think of marriage now; younger than you,
Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,
Are made already mothers: by my count,
I was your mother much upon these years
That you are now a maid. Thus then in brief:
The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.

Nurse:
A man, young lady! lady, such a man
As all the world--why, he's a man of wax.

LADY CAPULET:
Verona's summer hath not such a flower.

Nurse:
Nay, he's a flower; in faith, a very flower.

LADY CAPULET:
What say you? can you love the gentleman?
This night you shall behold him at our feast;
Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face,
And find delight writ there with beauty's pen;
Examine every married lineament,
And see how one another lends content
And what obscured in this fair volume lies
Find written in the margent of his eyes.
This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
To beautify him, only lacks a cover:
The fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride
For fair without the fair within to hide:
That book in many's eyes doth share the glory,
That in gold clasps locks in the golden story;
So shall you share all that he doth possess,
By having him, making yourself no less.

Nurse:
No less! nay, bigger; women grow by men.

LADY CAPULET:
Speak briefly, can you like of Paris' love?

JULIET:
I'll look to like, if looking liking move:
But no more deep will I endart mine eye
Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.

Servant:
Madam, the guests are come, supper served up, you
called, my young lady asked for, the nurse cursed in
the pantry, and every thing in extremity. I must
hence to wait; I beseech you, follow straight.

LADY CAPULET:
We follow thee.
Juliet, the county stays.

Nurse:
Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.

ROMEO:
What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
Or shall we on without a apology?

BENVOLIO:
The date is out of such prolixity:
We'll have no Cupid hoodwink'd with a scarf,
Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath,
Scaring the ladies like a crow-keeper;
Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke
After the prompter, for our entrance:
But let them measure us by what they will;
We'll measure them a measure, and be gone.

ROMEO:
Give me a torch: I am not for this ambling;
Being but heavy, I will bear the light.

MERCUTIO:
Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.

ROMEO:
Not I, believe me: you have dancing shoes
With nimble soles: I have a soul of lead
So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.

MERCUTIO:
You are a lover; borrow Cupid's wings,
And soar with them above a common bound.

ROMEO:
I am too sore enpierced with his shaft
To soar with his light feathers, and so bound,
I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe:
Under love's heavy burden do I sink.

MERCUTIO:
And, to sink in it, should you burden love;
Too great oppression for a tender thing.

ROMEO:
Is love a tender thing? it is too rough,
Too rude, too boisterous, and it pricks like thorn.

MERCUTIO:
If love be rough with you, be rough with love;
Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.
Give me a case to put my visage in:
A visor for a visor! what care I
What curious eye doth quote deformities?
Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.

BENVOLIO:
Come, knock and enter; and no sooner in,
But every man betake him to his legs.

ROMEO:
A torch for me: let wantons light of heart
Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels,
For I am proverb'd with a grandsire phrase;
I'll be a candle-holder, and look on.
The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.

MERCUTIO:
Tut, dun's the mouse, the constable's own word:
If thou art dun, we'll draw thee from the mire
Of this sir-reverence love, wherein thou stick'st
Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!

ROMEO:
Nay, that's not so.

MERCUTIO:
I mean, sir, in delay
We waste our lights in vain, like lamps by day.
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
Five times in that ere once in our five wits.

ROMEO:
And we mean well in going to this mask;
But 'tis no wit to go.

MERCUTIO:
Why, may one ask?

ROMEO:
I dream'd a dream to-night.

MERCUTIO:
And so did I.

ROMEO:
Well, what was yours?

MERCUTIO:
That dreamers often lie.

ROMEO:
In bed asleep, while they do dream things true.

MERCUTIO:
O, then, I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes
In shape no bigger than an agate-stone
On the fore-finger of an alderman,
Drawn with a team of little atomies
Athwart men's noses as they lie asleep;
Her wagon-spokes made of long spiders' legs,
The cover of the wings of grasshoppers,
The traces of the smallest spider's web,
The collars of the moonshine's watery beams,
Her whip of cricket's bone, the lash of film,
Her wagoner a small grey-coated gnat,
Not so big as a round little worm
Prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid;
Her chariot is an empty hazel-nut
Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers.
And in this state she gallops night by night
Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love;
O'er courtiers' knees, that dream on court'sies straight,
O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees,
O'er ladies ' lips, who straight on kisses dream,
Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,
Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are:
Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,
And then dreams he of smelling out a suit;
And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail
Tickling a parson's nose as a' lies asleep,
Then dreams, he of another benefice:
Sometime she driveth o'er a soldier's neck,
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,
Of healths five-fathom deep; and then anon
Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes,
And being thus frighted swears a prayer or two
And sleeps again. This is that very Mab
That plats the manes of horses in the night,
And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish hairs,
Which once untangled, much misfortune bodes:
This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
That presses them and learns them first to bear,
Making them women of good carriage:
This is she--

ROMEO:
Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace!
Thou talk'st of nothing.

MERCUTIO:
True, I talk of dreams,
Which are the children of an idle brain,
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy,
Which is as thin of substance as the air
And more inconstant than the wind, who wooes
Even now the frozen bosom of the north,
And, being anger'd, puffs away from thence,
Turning his face to the dew-dropping south.

BENVOLIO:
This wind, you talk of, blows us from ourselves;
Supper is done, and we shall come too late.

ROMEO:
I fear, too early: for my mind misgives
Some consequence yet hanging in the stars
Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
With this night's revels and expire the term
Of a despised life closed in my breast
By some vile forfeit of untimely death.
But He, that hath the steerage of my course,
Direct my sail! On, lusty gentlemen.

BENVOLIO:
Strike, drum.

First Servant:
Where's Potpan, that he helps not to take away? He
shift a trencher? he scrape a trencher!

Second Servant:
When good manners shall lie all in one or two men's
hands and they unwashed too, 'tis a foul thing.

First Servant:
Away with the joint-stools, remove the
court-cupboard, look to the plate. Good thou, save
me a piece of marchpane; and, as thou lovest me, let
the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell.
Antony, and Potpan!

Second Servant:
Ay, boy, ready.

First Servant:
You are looked for and called for, asked for and
sought for, in the great chamber.

Second Servant:
We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly, boys; be
brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.

CAPULET:
Welcome, gentlemen! ladies that have their toes
Unplagued with corns will have a bout with you.
Ah ha, my mistresses! which of you all
Will now deny to dance? she that makes dainty,
She, I'll swear, hath corns; am I come near ye now?
Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day
That I have worn a visor and could tell
A whispering tale in a fair lady's ear,
Such as would please: 'tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone:
You are welcome, gentlemen! come, musicians, play.
A hall, a hall! give room! and foot it, girls.
More light, you knaves; and turn the tables up,
And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot.
Ah, sirrah, this unlook'd-for sport comes well.
Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet;
For you and I are past our dancing days:
How long is't now since last yourself and I
Were in a mask?

Second Capulet:
By'r lady, thirty years.

CAPULET:
What, man! 'tis not so much, 'tis not so much:
'Tis since the nuptials of Lucentio,
Come pentecost as quickly as it will,
Some five and twenty years; and then we mask'd.

Second Capulet:
'Tis more, 'tis more, his son is elder, sir;
His son is thirty.

CAPULET:
Will you tell me that?
His son was but a ward two years ago.

ROMEO:

Servant:
I know not, sir.

ROMEO:
O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
Like a rich jewel in an Ethiope's ear;
Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!
So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows,
As yonder lady o'er her fellows shows.
The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand,
And, touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.
Did my heart love till now? forswear it, sight!
For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.

TYBALT:
This, by his voice, should be a Montague.
Fetch me my rapier, boy. What dares the slave
Come hither, cover'd with an antic face,
To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?
Now, by the stock and honour of my kin,
To strike him dead, I hold it not a sin.

CAPULET:
Why, how now, kinsman! wherefore storm you so?

TYBALT:
Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe,
A villain that is hither come in spite,
To scorn at our solemnity this night.

CAPULET:
Young Romeo is it?

TYBALT:
'Tis he, that villain Romeo.

CAPULET:
Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone;
He bears him like a portly gentleman;
And, to say truth, Verona brags of him
To be a virtuous and well-govern'd youth:
I would not for the wealth of all the town
Here in my house do him disparagement:
Therefore be patient, take no note of him:
It is my will, the which if thou respect,
Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
And ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.

TYBALT:
It fits, when such a villain is a guest:
I'll not endure him.

CAPULET:
He shall be endured:
What, goodman boy! I say, he shall: go to;
Am I the master here, or you? go to.
You'll not endure him! God shall mend my soul!
You'll make a mutiny among my guests!
You will set cock-a-hoop! you'll be the man!

TYBALT:
Why, uncle, 'tis a shame.

CAPULET:
Go to, go to;
You are a saucy boy: is't so, indeed?
This trick may chance to scathe you, I know what:
You must contrary me! marry, 'tis time.
Well said, my hearts! You are a princox; go:
Be quiet, or--More light, more light! For shame!
I'll make you quiet. What, cheerly, my hearts!

TYBALT:
Patience perforce with wilful choler meeting
Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.
I will withdraw: but this intrusion shall
Now seeming sweet convert to bitter gall.

ROMEO:

JULIET:
Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,
And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.

ROMEO:
Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?

JULIET:
Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.

ROMEO:
O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do;
They pray, grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.

JULIET:
Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.

ROMEO:
Then move not, while my prayer's effect I take.
Thus from my lips, by yours, my sin is purged.

JULIET:
Then have my lips the sin that they have took.

ROMEO:
Sin from thy lips? O trespass sweetly urged!
Give me my sin again.

JULIET:
You kiss by the book.

Nurse:
Madam, your mother craves a word with you.

ROMEO:
What is her mother?

Nurse:
Marry, bachelor,
Her mother is the lady of the house,
And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous
I nursed her daughter, that you talk'd withal;
I tell you, he that can lay hold of her
Shall have the chinks.

ROMEO:
Is she a Capulet?
O dear account! my life is my foe's debt.

BENVOLIO:
Away, begone; the sport is at the best.

ROMEO:
Ay, so I fear; the more is my unrest.

CAPULET:
Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone;
We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.
Is it e'en so? why, then, I thank you all
I thank you, honest gentlemen; good night.
More torches here! Come on then, let's to bed.
Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late:
I'll to my rest.

JULIET:
Come hither, nurse. What is yond gentleman?

Nurse:
The son and heir of old Tiberio.

JULIET:
What's he that now is going out of door?

Nurse:
Marry, that, I think, be young Petrucio.

JULIET:
What's he that follows there, that would not dance?

Nurse:
I know not.

JULIET:
Go ask his name: if he be married.
My grave is like to be my wedding bed.

Nurse:
His name is Romeo, and a Montague;
The only son of your great enemy.

JULIET:
My only love sprung from my only hate!
Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
Prodigious birth of love it is to me,
That I must love a loathed enemy.

Nurse:
What's this? what's this?

JULIET:
A rhyme I learn'd even now
Of one I danced withal.

Nurse:
Anon, anon!
Come, let's away; the strangers all are gone.

Chorus:
Now old desire doth in his death-bed lie,
And young affection gapes to be his heir;
That fair for which love groan'd for and would die,
With tender Juliet match'd, is now not fair.
Now Romeo is beloved and loves again,
Alike betwitched by the charm of looks,
But to his foe supposed he must complain,
And she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks:
Being held a foe, he may not have access
To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear;
And she as much in love, her means much less
To meet her new-beloved any where:
But passion lends them power, time means, to meet
Tempering extremities with extreme sweet.

ROMEO:
Can I go forward when my heart is here?
Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.

BENVOLIO:
Romeo! my cousin Romeo!

MERCUTIO:
He is wise;
And, on my lie, hath stol'n him home to bed.

BENVOLIO:
He ran this way, and leap'd this orchard wall:
Call, good Mercutio.

MERCUTIO:
Nay, I'll conjure too.
Romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover!
Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh:
Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied;
Cry but 'Ay me!' pronounce but 'love' and 'dove;'
Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,
One nick-name for her purblind son and heir,
Young Adam Cupid, he that shot so trim,
When King Cophetua loved the beggar-maid!
He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not;
The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.
I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright eyes,
By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,
By her fine foot, straight leg and quivering thigh
And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,
That in thy likeness thou appear to us!

BENVOLIO:
And if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.

MERCUTIO:
This cannot anger him: 'twould anger him
To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle
Of some strange nature, letting it there stand
Till she had laid it and conjured it down;
That were some spite: my invocation
Is fair and honest, and in his mistress' name
I conjure only but to raise up him.

BENVOLIO:
Come, he hath hid himself among these trees,
To be consorted with the humorous night:
Blind is his love and best befits the dark.

MERCUTIO:
If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
Now will he sit under a medlar tree,
And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
As maids call medlars, when they laugh alone.
Romeo, that she were, O, that she were
An open et caetera, thou a poperin pear!
Romeo, good night: I'll to my truckle-bed;
This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep:
Come, shall we go?

BENVOLIO:
Go, then; for 'tis in vain
To seek him here that means not to be found.

ROMEO:
He jests at scars that never felt a wound.
But, soft! what light through yonder window breaks?
It is the east, and Juliet is the sun.
Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
Who is already sick and pale with grief,
That thou her maid art far more fair than she:
Be not her maid, since she is envious;
Her vestal livery is but sick and green
And none but fools do wear it; cast it off.
It is my lady, O, it is my love!
O, that she knew she were!
She speaks yet she says nothing: what of that?
Her eye discourses; I will answer it.
I am too bold, 'tis not to me she speaks:
Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,
Having some business, do entreat her eyes
To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
What if her eyes were there, they in her head?
The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars,
As daylight doth a lamp; her eyes in heaven
Would through the airy region stream so bright
That birds would sing and think it were not night.
See, how she leans her cheek upon her hand!
O, that I were a glove upon that hand,
That I might touch that cheek!

JULIET:
Ay me!

ROMEO:
She speaks:
O, speak again, bright angel! for thou art
As glorious to this night, being o'er my head
As is a winged messenger of heaven
Unto the white-upturned wondering eyes
Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him
When he bestrides the lazy-pacing clouds
And sails upon the bosom of the air.

JULIET:
O Romeo, Romeo! wherefore art thou Romeo?
Deny thy father and refuse thy name;
Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,
And I'll no longer be a Capulet.

ROMEO:

JULIET:
'Tis but thy name that is my enemy;
Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
What's Montague? it is nor hand, nor foot,
Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part
Belonging to a man. O, be some other name!
What's in a name? that which we call a rose
By any other name would smell as sweet;
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo call'd,
Retain that dear perfection which he owes
Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name,
And for that name which is no part of thee
Take all myself.

ROMEO:
I take thee at thy word:
Call me but love, and I'll be new baptized;
Henceforth I never will be Romeo.

JULIET:
What man art thou that thus bescreen'd in night
So stumblest on my counsel?

ROMEO:
By a name
I know not how to tell thee who I am:
My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself,
Because it is an enemy to thee;
Had I it written, I would tear the word.

JULIET:
My ears have not yet drunk a hundred words
Of that tongue's utterance, yet I know the sound:
Art thou not Romeo and a Montague?

ROMEO:
Neither, fair saint, if either thee dislike.

JULIET:
How camest thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
And the place death, considering who thou art,
If any of my kinsmen find thee here.

ROMEO:
With love's light wings did I o'er-perch these walls;
For stony limits cannot hold love out,
And what love can do that dares love attempt;
Therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me.

JULIET:
If they do see thee, they will murder thee.

ROMEO:
Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
Than twenty of their swords: look thou but sweet,
And I am proof against their enmity.

JULIET:
I would not for the world they saw thee here.

ROMEO:
I have night's cloak to hide me from their sight;
And but thou love me, let them find me here:
My life were better ended by their hate,
Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.

JULIET:
By whose direction found'st thou out this place?

ROMEO:
By love, who first did prompt me to inquire;
He lent me counsel and I lent him eyes.
I am no pilot; yet, wert thou as far
As that vast shore wash'd with the farthest sea,
I would adventure for such merchandise.

JULIET:
Thou know'st the mask of night is on my face,
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night
Fain would I dwell on form, fain, fain deny
What I have spoke: but farewell compliment!
Dost thou love me? I know thou wilt say 'Ay,'
And I will take thy word: yet if thou swear'st,
Thou mayst prove false; at lovers' perjuries
Then say, Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully:
Or if thou think'st I am too quickly won,
I'll frown and be perverse an say thee nay,
So thou wilt woo; but else, not for the world.
In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond,
And therefore thou mayst think my 'havior light:
But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true
Than those that have more cunning to be strange.
I should have been more strange, I must confess,
But that thou overheard'st, ere I was ware,
My true love's passion: therefore pardon me,
And not impute this yielding to light love,
Which the dark night hath so discovered.

ROMEO:
Lady, by yonder blessed moon I swear
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops--

JULIET:
O, swear not by the moon, the inconstant moon,
That monthly changes in her circled orb,
Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.

ROMEO:
What shall I swear by?

JULIET:
Do not swear at all;
Or, if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
Which is the god of my idolatry,
And I'll believe thee.

ROMEO:
If my heart's dear love--

JULIET:
Well, do not swear: although I joy in thee,
I have no joy of this contract to-night:
It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden;
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
Ere one can say 'It lightens.' Sweet, good night!
This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath,
May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet.
Good night, good night! as sweet repose and rest
Come to thy heart as that within my breast!

ROMEO:
O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?

JULIET:
What satisfaction canst thou have to-night?

ROMEO:
The exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.

JULIET:
I gave thee mine before thou didst request it:
And yet I would it were to give again.

ROMEO:
Wouldst thou withdraw it? for what purpose, love?

JULIET:
But to be frank, and give it thee again.
And yet I wish but for the thing I have:
My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
My love as deep; the more I give to thee,
The more I have, for both are infinite.
I hear some noise within; dear love, adieu!
Anon, good nurse! Sweet Montague, be true.
Stay but a little, I will come again.

ROMEO:
O blessed, blessed night! I am afeard.
Being in night, all this is but a dream,
Too flattering-sweet to be substantial.

JULIET:
Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.
If that thy bent of love be honourable,
Thy purpose marriage, send me word to-morrow,
By one that I'll procure to come to thee,
Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite;
And all my fortunes at thy foot I'll lay
And follow thee my lord throughout the world.

Nurse:

JULIET:
I come, anon.--But if thou mean'st not well,
I do beseech thee--

Nurse:

JULIET:
By and by, I come:--
To cease thy suit, and leave me to my grief:
To-morrow will I send.

ROMEO:
So thrive my soul--

JULIET:
A thousand times good night!

ROMEO:
A thousand times the worse, to want thy light.
Love goes toward love, as schoolboys from
their books,
But love from love, toward school with heavy looks.

JULIET:
Hist! Romeo, hist! O, for a falconer's voice,
To lure this tassel-gentle back again!
Bondage is hoarse, and may not speak aloud;
Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,
And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine,
With repetition of my Romeo's name.

ROMEO:
It is my soul that calls upon my name:
How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night,
Like softest music to attending ears!

JULIET:
Romeo!

ROMEO:
My dear?

JULIET:
At what o'clock to-morrow
Shall I send to thee?

ROMEO:
At the hour of nine.

JULIET:
I will not fail: 'tis twenty years till then.
I have forgot why I did call thee back.

ROMEO:
Let me stand here till thou remember it.

JULIET:
I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
Remembering how I love thy company.

ROMEO:
And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget,
Forgetting any other home but this.

JULIET:
'Tis almost morning; I would have thee gone:
And yet no further than a wanton's bird;
Who lets it hop a little from her hand,
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,
And with a silk thread plucks it back again,
So loving-jealous of his liberty.

ROMEO:
I would I were thy bird.

JULIET:
Sweet, so would I:
Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
Good night, good night! parting is such
sweet sorrow,
That I shall say good night till it be morrow.

ROMEO:
Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast!
Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest!
Hence will I to my ghostly father's cell,
His help to crave, and my dear hap to tell.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
The grey-eyed morn smiles on the frowning night,
Chequering the eastern clouds with streaks of light,
And flecked darkness like a drunkard reels
From forth day's path and Titan's fiery wheels:
Now, ere the sun advance his burning eye,
The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry,
I must up-fill this osier cage of ours
With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers.
The earth that's nature's mother is her tomb;
What is her burying grave that is her womb,
And from her womb children of divers kind
We sucking on her natural bosom find,
Many for many virtues excellent,
None but for some and yet all different.
O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies
In herbs, plants, stones, and their true qualities:
For nought so vile that on the earth doth live
But to the earth some special good doth give,
Nor aught so good but strain'd from that fair use
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse:
Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied;
And vice sometimes by action dignified.
Within the infant rind of this small flower
Poison hath residence and medicine power:
For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part;
Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart.
Two such opposed kings encamp them still
In man as well as herbs, grace and rude will;
And where the worser is predominant,
Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.

ROMEO:
Good morrow, father.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Benedicite!
What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
Young son, it argues a distemper'd head
So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed:
Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,
And where care lodges, sleep will never lie;
But where unbruised youth with unstuff'd brain
Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign:
Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
Thou art up-roused by some distemperature;
Or if not so, then here I hit it right,
Our Romeo hath not been in bed to-night.

ROMEO:
That last is true; the sweeter rest was mine.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
God pardon sin! wast thou with Rosaline?

ROMEO:
With Rosaline, my ghostly father? no;
I have forgot that name, and that name's woe.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
That's my good son: but where hast thou been, then?

ROMEO:
I'll tell thee, ere thou ask it me again.
I have been feasting with mine enemy,
Where on a sudden one hath wounded me,
That's by me wounded: both our remedies
Within thy help and holy physic lies:
I bear no hatred, blessed man, for, lo,
My intercession likewise steads my foe.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift;
Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.

ROMEO:
Then plainly know my heart's dear love is set
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet:
As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine;
And all combined, save what thou must combine
By holy marriage: when and where and how
We met, we woo'd and made exchange of vow,
I'll tell thee as we pass; but this I pray,
That thou consent to marry us to-day.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Holy Saint Francis, what a change is here!
Is Rosaline, whom thou didst love so dear,
So soon forsaken? young men's love then lies
Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
Jesu Maria, what a deal of brine
Hath wash'd thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!
How much salt water thrown away in waste,
To season love, that of it doth not taste!
The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,
Thy old groans ring yet in my ancient ears;
Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
Of an old tear that is not wash'd off yet:
If e'er thou wast thyself and these woes thine,
Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline:
And art thou changed? pronounce this sentence then,
Women may fall, when there's no strength in men.

ROMEO:
Thou chid'st me oft for loving Rosaline.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.

ROMEO:
And bad'st me bury love.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Not in a grave,
To lay one in, another out to have.

ROMEO:
I pray thee, chide not; she whom I love now
Doth grace for grace and love for love allow;
The other did not so.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
O, she knew well
Thy love did read by rote and could not spell.
But come, young waverer, come, go with me,
In one respect I'll thy assistant be;
For this alliance may so happy prove,
To turn your households' rancour to pure love.

ROMEO:
O, let us hence; I stand on sudden haste.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Wisely and slow; they stumble that run fast.

MERCUTIO:
Where the devil should this Romeo be?
Came he not home to-night?

BENVOLIO:
Not to his father's; I spoke with his man.

MERCUTIO:
Ah, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline.
Torments him so, that he will sure run mad.

BENVOLIO:
Tybalt, the kinsman of old Capulet,
Hath sent a letter to his father's house.

MERCUTIO:
A challenge, on my life.

BENVOLIO:
Romeo will answer it.

MERCUTIO:
Any man that can write may answer a letter.

BENVOLIO:
Nay, he will answer the letter's master, how he
dares, being dared.

MERCUTIO:
Alas poor Romeo! he is already dead; stabbed with a
white wench's black eye; shot through the ear with a
love-song; the very pin of his heart cleft with the
blind bow-boy's butt-shaft: and is he a man to
encounter Tybalt?

BENVOLIO:
Why, what is Tybalt?

MERCUTIO:
More than prince of cats, I can tell you. O, he is
the courageous captain of compliments. He fights as
you sing prick-song, keeps time, distance, and
proportion; rests me his minim rest, one, two, and
the third in your bosom: the very butcher of a silk
button, a duellist, a duellist; a gentleman of the
very first house, of the first and second cause:
ah, the immortal passado! the punto reverso! the
hai!

BENVOLIO:
The what?

MERCUTIO:
The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting
fantasticoes; these new tuners of accents! 'By Jesu,
a very good blade! a very tall man! a very good
whore!' Why, is not this a lamentable thing,
grandsire, that we should be thus afflicted with
these strange flies, these fashion-mongers, these
perdona-mi's, who stand so much on the new form,
that they cannot at ease on the old bench? O, their
bones, their bones!

BENVOLIO:
Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo.

MERCUTIO:
Without his roe, like a dried herring: flesh, flesh,
how art thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers
that Petrarch flowed in: Laura to his lady was but a
kitchen-wench; marry, she had a better love to
be-rhyme her; Dido a dowdy; Cleopatra a gipsy;
Helen and Hero hildings and harlots; Thisbe a grey
eye or so, but not to the purpose. Signior
Romeo, bon jour! there's a French salutation
to your French slop. You gave us the counterfeit
fairly last night.

ROMEO:
Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?

MERCUTIO:
The ship, sir, the slip; can you not conceive?

ROMEO:
Pardon, good Mercutio, my business was great; and in
such a case as mine a man may strain courtesy.

MERCUTIO:
That's as much as to say, such a case as yours
constrains a man to bow in the hams.

ROMEO:
Meaning, to court'sy.

MERCUTIO:
Thou hast most kindly hit it.

ROMEO:
A most courteous exposition.

MERCUTIO:
Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.

ROMEO:
Pink for flower.

MERCUTIO:
Right.

ROMEO:
Why, then is my pump well flowered.

MERCUTIO:
Well said: follow me this jest now till thou hast
worn out thy pump, that when the single sole of it
is worn, the jest may remain after the wearing sole singular.

ROMEO:
O single-soled jest, solely singular for the
singleness.

MERCUTIO:
Come between us, good Benvolio; my wits faint.

ROMEO:
Switch and spurs, switch and spurs; or I'll cry a match.

MERCUTIO:
Nay, if thy wits run the wild-goose chase, I have
done, for thou hast more of the wild-goose in one of
thy wits than, I am sure, I have in my whole five:
was I with you there for the goose?

ROMEO:
Thou wast never with me for any thing when thou wast
not there for the goose.

MERCUTIO:
I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.

ROMEO:
Nay, good goose, bite not.

MERCUTIO:
Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most
sharp sauce.

ROMEO:
And is it not well served in to a sweet goose?

MERCUTIO:
O here's a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an
inch narrow to an ell broad!

ROMEO:
I stretch it out for that word 'broad;' which added
to the goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.

MERCUTIO:
Why, is not this better now than groaning for love?
now art thou sociable, now art thou Romeo; now art
thou what thou art, by art as well as by nature:
for this drivelling love is like a great natural,
that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in a hole.

BENVOLIO:
Stop there, stop there.

MERCUTIO:
Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.

BENVOLIO:
Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.

MERCUTIO:
O, thou art deceived; I would have made it short:
for I was come to the whole depth of my tale; and
meant, indeed, to occupy the argument no longer.

ROMEO:
Here's goodly gear!

MERCUTIO:
A sail, a sail!

BENVOLIO:
Two, two; a shirt and a smock.

Nurse:
Peter!

PETER:
Anon!

Nurse:
My fan, Peter.

MERCUTIO:
Good Peter, to hide her face; for her fan's the
fairer face.

Nurse:
God ye good morrow, gentlemen.

MERCUTIO:
God ye good den, fair gentlewoman.

Nurse:
Is it good den?

MERCUTIO:
'Tis no less, I tell you, for the bawdy hand of the
dial is now upon the prick of noon.

Nurse:
Out upon you! what a man are you!

ROMEO:
One, gentlewoman, that God hath made for himself to
mar.

Nurse:
By my troth, it is well said; 'for himself to mar,'
quoth a'? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I
may find the young Romeo?

ROMEO:
I can tell you; but young Romeo will be older when
you have found him than he was when you sought him:
I am the youngest of that name, for fault of a worse.

Nurse:
You say well.

MERCUTIO:
Yea, is the worst well? very well took, i' faith;
wisely, wisely.

Nurse:
if you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with
you.

BENVOLIO:
She will indite him to some supper.

MERCUTIO:
A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! so ho!

ROMEO:
What hast thou found?

MERCUTIO:
No hare, sir; unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie,
that is something stale and hoar ere it be spent.
An old hare hoar,
And an old hare hoar,
Is very good meat in lent
But a hare that is hoar
Is too much for a score,
When it hoars ere it be spent.
Romeo, will you come to your father's? we'll
to dinner, thither.

ROMEO:
I will follow you.

MERCUTIO:
Farewell, ancient lady; farewell,
'lady, lady, lady.'

Nurse:
Marry, farewell! I pray you, sir, what saucy
merchant was this, that was so full of his ropery?

ROMEO:
A gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself talk,
and will speak more in a minute than he will stand
to in a month.

Nurse:
An a' speak any thing against me, I'll take him
down, an a' were lustier than he is, and twenty such
Jacks; and if I cannot, I'll find those that shall.
Scurvy knave! I am none of his flirt-gills; I am
none of his skains-mates. And thou must stand by
too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure?

PETER:
I saw no man use you a pleasure; if I had, my weapon
should quickly have been out, I warrant you: I dare
draw as soon as another man, if I see occasion in a
good quarrel, and the law on my side.

Nurse:
Now, afore God, I am so vexed, that every part about
me quivers. Scurvy knave! Pray you, sir, a word:
and as I told you, my young lady bade me inquire you
out; what she bade me say, I will keep to myself:
but first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her into
a fool's paradise, as they say, it were a very gross
kind of behavior, as they say: for the gentlewoman
is young; and, therefore, if you should deal double
with her, truly it were an ill thing to be offered
to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.

ROMEO:
Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I
protest unto thee--

Nurse:
Good heart, and, i' faith, I will tell her as much:
Lord, Lord, she will be a joyful woman.

ROMEO:
What wilt thou tell her, nurse? thou dost not mark me.

Nurse:
I will tell her, sir, that you do protest; which, as
I take it, is a gentlemanlike offer.

ROMEO:
Bid her devise
Some means to come to shrift this afternoon;
And there she shall at Friar Laurence' cell
Be shrived and married. Here is for thy pains.

Nurse:
No truly sir; not a penny.

ROMEO:
Go to; I say you shall.

Nurse:
This afternoon, sir? well, she shall be there.

ROMEO:
And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey wall:
Within this hour my man shall be with thee
And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair;
Which to the high top-gallant of my joy
Must be my convoy in the secret night.
Farewell; be trusty, and I'll quit thy pains:
Farewell; commend me to thy mistress.

Nurse:
Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.

ROMEO:
What say'st thou, my dear nurse?

Nurse:
Is your man secret? Did you ne'er hear say,
Two may keep counsel, putting one away?

ROMEO:
I warrant thee, my man's as true as steel.

NURSE:
Well, sir; my mistress is the sweetest lady--Lord,
Lord! when 'twas a little prating thing:--O, there
is a nobleman in town, one Paris, that would fain
lay knife aboard; but she, good soul, had as lief
see a toad, a very toad, as see him. I anger her
sometimes and tell her that Paris is the properer
man; but, I'll warrant you, when I say so, she looks
as pale as any clout in the versal world. Doth not
rosemary and Romeo begin both with a letter?

ROMEO:
Ay, nurse; what of that? both with an R.

Nurse:
Ah. mocker! that's the dog's name; R is for
the--No; I know it begins with some other
letter:--and she hath the prettiest sententious of
it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good
to hear it.

ROMEO:
Commend me to thy lady.

Nurse:
Ay, a thousand times.
Peter!

PETER:
Anon!

Nurse:
Peter, take my fan, and go before and apace.

JULIET:
The clock struck nine when I did send the nurse;
In half an hour she promised to return.
Perchance she cannot meet him: that's not so.
O, she is lame! love's heralds should be thoughts,
Which ten times faster glide than the sun's beams,
Driving back shadows over louring hills:
Therefore do nimble-pinion'd doves draw love,
And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.
Now is the sun upon the highmost hill
Of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve
Is three long hours, yet she is not come.
Had she affections and warm youthful blood,
She would be as swift in motion as a ball;
My words would bandy her to my sweet love,
And his to me:
But old folks, many feign as they were dead;
Unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead.
O God, she comes!
O honey nurse, what news?
Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.

Nurse:
Peter, stay at the gate.

JULIET:
Now, good sweet nurse,--O Lord, why look'st thou sad?
Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily;
If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news
By playing it to me with so sour a face.

Nurse:
I am a-weary, give me leave awhile:
Fie, how my bones ache! what a jaunt have I had!

JULIET:
I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news:
Nay, come, I pray thee, speak; good, good nurse, speak.

Nurse:
Jesu, what haste? can you not stay awhile?
Do you not see that I am out of breath?

JULIET:
How art thou out of breath, when thou hast breath
To say to me that thou art out of breath?
The excuse that thou dost make in this delay
Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
Is thy news good, or bad? answer to that;
Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance:
Let me be satisfied, is't good or bad?

Nurse:
Well, you have made a simple choice; you know not
how to choose a man: Romeo! no, not he; though his
face be better than any man's, yet his leg excels
all men's; and for a hand, and a foot, and a body,
though they be not to be talked on, yet they are
past compare: he is not the flower of courtesy,
but, I'll warrant him, as gentle as a lamb. Go thy
ways, wench; serve God. What, have you dined at home?

JULIET:
No, no: but all this did I know before.
What says he of our marriage? what of that?

Nurse:
Lord, how my head aches! what a head have I!
It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
My back o' t' other side,--O, my back, my back!
Beshrew your heart for sending me about,
To catch my death with jaunting up and down!

JULIET:
I' faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.
Sweet, sweet, sweet nurse, tell me, what says my love?

Nurse:
Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a
courteous, and a kind, and a handsome, and, I
warrant, a virtuous,--Where is your mother?

JULIET:
Where is my mother! why, she is within;
Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest!
'Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
Where is your mother?'

Nurse:
O God's lady dear!
Are you so hot? marry, come up, I trow;
Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
Henceforward do your messages yourself.

JULIET:
Here's such a coil! come, what says Romeo?

Nurse:
Have you got leave to go to shrift to-day?

JULIET:
I have.

Nurse:
Then hie you hence to Friar Laurence' cell;
There stays a husband to make you a wife:
Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks,
They'll be in scarlet straight at any news.
Hie you to church; I must another way,
To fetch a ladder, by the which your love
Must climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark:
I am the drudge and toil in your delight,
But you shall bear the burden soon at night.
Go; I'll to dinner: hie you to the cell.

JULIET:
Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, farewell.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
So smile the heavens upon this holy act,
That after hours with sorrow chide us not!

ROMEO:
Amen, amen! but come what sorrow can,
It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
That one short minute gives me in her sight:
Do thou but close our hands with holy words,
Then love-devouring death do what he dare;
It is enough I may but call her mine.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
These violent delights have violent ends
And in their triumph die, like fire and powder,
Which as they kiss consume: the sweetest honey
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness
And in the taste confounds the appetite:
Therefore love moderately; long love doth so;
Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.
Here comes the lady: O, so light a foot
Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint:
A lover may bestride the gossamer
That idles in the wanton summer air,
And yet not fall; so light is vanity.

JULIET:
Good even to my ghostly confessor.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.

JULIET:
As much to him, else is his thanks too much.

ROMEO:
Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
Be heap'd like mine and that thy skill be more
To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
This neighbour air, and let rich music's tongue
Unfold the imagined happiness that both
Receive in either by this dear encounter.

JULIET:
Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,
Brags of his substance, not of ornament:
They are but beggars that can count their worth;
But my true love is grown to such excess
I cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Come, come with me, and we will make short work;
For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone
Till holy church incorporate two in one.

BENVOLIO:
I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire:
The day is hot, the Capulets abroad,
And, if we meet, we shall not scape a brawl;
For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.

MERCUTIO:
Thou art like one of those fellows that when he
enters the confines of a tavern claps me his sword
upon the table and says 'God send me no need of
thee!' and by the operation of the second cup draws
it on the drawer, when indeed there is no need.

BENVOLIO:
Am I like such a fellow?

MERCUTIO:
Come, come, thou art as hot a Jack in thy mood as
any in Italy, and as soon moved to be moody, and as
soon moody to be moved.

BENVOLIO:
And what to?

MERCUTIO:
Nay, an there were two such, we should have none
shortly, for one would kill the other. Thou! why,
thou wilt quarrel with a man that hath a hair more,
or a hair less, in his beard, than thou hast: thou
wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no
other reason but because thou hast hazel eyes: what
eye but such an eye would spy out such a quarrel?
Thy head is as fun of quarrels as an egg is full of
meat, and yet thy head hath been beaten as addle as
an egg for quarrelling: thou hast quarrelled with a
man for coughing in the street, because he hath
wakened thy dog that hath lain asleep in the sun:
didst thou not fall out with a tailor for wearing
his new doublet before Easter? with another, for
tying his new shoes with old riband? and yet thou
wilt tutor me from quarrelling!

BENVOLIO:
An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man
should buy the fee-simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.

MERCUTIO:
The fee-simple! O simple!

BENVOLIO:
By my head, here come the Capulets.

MERCUTIO:
By my heel, I care not.

TYBALT:
Follow me close, for I will speak to them.
Gentlemen, good den: a word with one of you.

MERCUTIO:
And but one word with one of us? couple it with
something; make it a word and a blow.

TYBALT:
You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an you
will give me occasion.

MERCUTIO:
Could you not take some occasion without giving?

TYBALT:
Mercutio, thou consort'st with Romeo,--

MERCUTIO:
Consort! what, dost thou make us minstrels? an
thou make minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but
discords: here's my fiddlestick; here's that shall
make you dance. 'Zounds, consort!

BENVOLIO:
We talk here in the public haunt of men:
Either withdraw unto some private place,
And reason coldly of your grievances,
Or else depart; here all eyes gaze on us.

MERCUTIO:
Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze;
I will not budge for no man's pleasure, I.

TYBALT:
Well, peace be with you, sir: here comes my man.

MERCUTIO:
But I'll be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery:
Marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower;
Your worship in that sense may call him 'man.'

TYBALT:
Romeo, the hate I bear thee can afford
No better term than this,--thou art a villain.

ROMEO:
Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee
Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
To such a greeting: villain am I none;
Therefore farewell; I see thou know'st me not.

TYBALT:
Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
That thou hast done me; therefore turn and draw.

ROMEO:
I do protest, I never injured thee,
But love thee better than thou canst devise,
Till thou shalt know the reason of my love:
And so, good Capulet,--which name I tender
As dearly as my own,--be satisfied.

MERCUTIO:
O calm, dishonourable, vile submission!
Alla stoccata carries it away.
Tybalt, you rat-catcher, will you walk?


--- End of file: shakespear_09.txt ---


TYBALT:
What wouldst thou have with me?

MERCUTIO:
Good king of cats, nothing but one of your nine
lives; that I mean to make bold withal, and as you
shall use me hereafter, drybeat the rest of the
eight. Will you pluck your sword out of his pitcher
by the ears? make haste, lest mine be about your
ears ere it be out.

TYBALT:
I am for you.

ROMEO:
Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.

MERCUTIO:
Come, sir, your passado.

ROMEO:
Draw, Benvolio; beat down their weapons.
Gentlemen, for shame, forbear this outrage!
Tybalt, Mercutio, the prince expressly hath
Forbidden bandying in Verona streets:
Hold, Tybalt! good Mercutio!

MERCUTIO:
I am hurt.
A plague o' both your houses! I am sped.
Is he gone, and hath nothing?

BENVOLIO:
What, art thou hurt?

MERCUTIO:
Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch; marry, 'tis enough.
Where is my page? Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.

ROMEO:
Courage, man; the hurt cannot be much.

MERCUTIO:
No, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a
church-door; but 'tis enough,'twill serve: ask for
me to-morrow, and you shall find me a grave man. I
am peppered, I warrant, for this world. A plague o'
both your houses! 'Zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a
cat, to scratch a man to death! a braggart, a
rogue, a villain, that fights by the book of
arithmetic! Why the devil came you between us? I
was hurt under your arm.

ROMEO:
I thought all for the best.

MERCUTIO:
Help me into some house, Benvolio,
Or I shall faint. A plague o' both your houses!
They have made worms' meat of me: I have it,
And soundly too: your houses!

ROMEO:
This gentleman, the prince's near ally,
My very friend, hath got his mortal hurt
In my behalf; my reputation stain'd
With Tybalt's slander,--Tybalt, that an hour
Hath been my kinsman! O sweet Juliet,
Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
And in my temper soften'd valour's steel!

BENVOLIO:
O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio's dead!
That gallant spirit hath aspired the clouds,
Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.

ROMEO:
This day's black fate on more days doth depend;
This but begins the woe, others must end.

BENVOLIO:
Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.

ROMEO:
Alive, in triumph! and Mercutio slain!
Away to heaven, respective lenity,
And fire-eyed fury be my conduct now!
Now, Tybalt, take the villain back again,
That late thou gavest me; for Mercutio's soul
Is but a little way above our heads,
Staying for thine to keep him company:
Either thou, or I, or both, must go with him.

TYBALT:
Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him here,
Shalt with him hence.

ROMEO:
This shall determine that.

BENVOLIO:
Romeo, away, be gone!
The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.
Stand not amazed: the prince will doom thee death,
If thou art taken: hence, be gone, away!

ROMEO:
O, I am fortune's fool!

BENVOLIO:
Why dost thou stay?

First Citizen:
Which way ran he that kill'd Mercutio?
Tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he?

BENVOLIO:
There lies that Tybalt.

First Citizen:
Up, sir, go with me;
I charge thee in the princes name, obey.

PRINCE:
Where are the vile beginners of this fray?

BENVOLIO:
O noble prince, I can discover all
The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl:
There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.

LADY CAPULET:
Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother's child!
O prince! O cousin! husband! O, the blood is spilt
O my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,
For blood of ours, shed blood of Montague.
O cousin, cousin!

PRINCE:
Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?

BENVOLIO:
Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did slay;
Romeo that spoke him fair, bade him bethink
How nice the quarrel was, and urged withal
Your high displeasure: all this uttered
With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bow'd,
Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
Of Tybalt deaf to peace, but that he tilts
With piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast,
Who all as hot, turns deadly point to point,
And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
Cold death aside, and with the other sends
It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity,
Retorts it: Romeo he cries aloud,
'Hold, friends! friends, part!' and, swifter than
his tongue,
His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
And 'twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm
An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life
Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled;
But by and by comes back to Romeo,
Who had but newly entertain'd revenge,
And to 't they go like lightning, for, ere I
Could draw to part them, was stout Tybalt slain.
And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly.
This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.

LADY CAPULET:
He is a kinsman to the Montague;
Affection makes him false; he speaks not true:
Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
And all those twenty could but kill one life.
I beg for justice, which thou, prince, must give;
Romeo slew Tybalt, Romeo must not live.

PRINCE:
Romeo slew him, he slew Mercutio;
Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?

MONTAGUE:
Not Romeo, prince, he was Mercutio's friend;
His fault concludes but what the law should end,
The life of Tybalt.

PRINCE:
And for that offence
Immediately we do exile him hence:
I have an interest in your hate's proceeding,
My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding;
But I'll amerce you with so strong a fine
That you shall all repent the loss of mine:
I will be deaf to pleading and excuses;
Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses:
Therefore use none: let Romeo hence in haste,
Else, when he's found, that hour is his last.
Bear hence this body and attend our will:
Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.

JULIET:
Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,
Towards Phoebus' lodging: such a wagoner
As Phaethon would whip you to the west,
And bring in cloudy night immediately.
Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,
That runaway's eyes may wink and Romeo
Leap to these arms, untalk'd of and unseen.
Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
By their own beauties; or, if love be blind,
It best agrees with night. Come, civil night,
Thou sober-suited matron, all in black,
And learn me how to lose a winning match,
Play'd for a pair of stainless maidenhoods:
Hood my unmann'd blood, bating in my cheeks,
With thy black mantle; till strange love, grown bold,
Think true love acted simple modesty.
Come, night; come, Romeo; come, thou day in night;
For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
Whiter than new snow on a raven's back.
Come, gentle night, come, loving, black-brow'd night,
Give me my Romeo; and, when he shall die,
Take him and cut him out in little stars,
And he will make the face of heaven so fine
That all the world will be in love with night
And pay no worship to the garish sun.
O, I have bought the mansion of a love,
But not possess'd it, and, though I am sold,
Not yet enjoy'd: so tedious is this day
As is the night before some festival
To an impatient child that hath new robes
And may not wear them. O, here comes my nurse,
And she brings news; and every tongue that speaks
But Romeo's name speaks heavenly eloquence.
Now, nurse, what news? What hast thou there? the cords
That Romeo bid thee fetch?

Nurse:
Ay, ay, the cords.

JULIET:
Ay me! what news? why dost thou wring thy hands?

Nurse:
Ah, well-a-day! he's dead, he's dead, he's dead!
We are undone, lady, we are undone!
Alack the day! he's gone, he's kill'd, he's dead!

JULIET:
Can heaven be so envious?

Nurse:
Romeo can,
Though heaven cannot: O Romeo, Romeo!
Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!

JULIET:
What devil art thou, that dost torment me thus?
This torture should be roar'd in dismal hell.
Hath Romeo slain himself? say thou but 'I,'
And that bare vowel 'I' shall poison more
Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice:
I am not I, if there be such an I;
Or those eyes shut, that make thee answer 'I.'
If he be slain, say 'I'; or if not, no:
Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.

Nurse:
I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes,--
God save the mark!--here on his manly breast:
A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse;
Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaub'd in blood,
All in gore-blood; I swounded at the sight.

JULIET:
O, break, my heart! poor bankrupt, break at once!
To prison, eyes, ne'er look on liberty!
Vile earth, to earth resign; end motion here;
And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier!

Nurse:
O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had!
O courteous Tybalt! honest gentleman!
That ever I should live to see thee dead!

JULIET:
What storm is this that blows so contrary?
Is Romeo slaughter'd, and is Tybalt dead?
My dear-loved cousin, and my dearer lord?
Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom!
For who is living, if those two are gone?

Nurse:
Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished;
Romeo that kill'd him, he is banished.

JULIET:
O God! did Romeo's hand shed Tybalt's blood?

Nurse:
It did, it did; alas the day, it did!

JULIET:
O serpent heart, hid with a flowering face!
Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?
Beautiful tyrant! fiend angelical!
Dove-feather'd raven! wolvish-ravening lamb!
Despised substance of divinest show!
Just opposite to what thou justly seem'st,
A damned saint, an honourable villain!
O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell,
When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend
In moral paradise of such sweet flesh?
Was ever book containing such vile matter
So fairly bound? O that deceit should dwell
In such a gorgeous palace!

Nurse:
There's no trust,
No faith, no honesty in men; all perjured,
All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.
Ah, where's my man? give me some aqua vitae:
These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.
Shame come to Romeo!

JULIET:
Blister'd be thy tongue
For such a wish! he was not born to shame:
Upon his brow shame is ashamed to sit;
For 'tis a throne where honour may be crown'd
Sole monarch of the universal earth.
O, what a beast was I to chide at him!

Nurse:
Will you speak well of him that kill'd your cousin?

JULIET:
Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name,
When I, thy three-hours wife, have mangled it?
But, wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?
That villain cousin would have kill'd my husband:
Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring;
Your tributary drops belong to woe,
Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy.
My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain;
And Tybalt's dead, that would have slain my husband:
All this is comfort; wherefore weep I then?
Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death,
That murder'd me: I would forget it fain;
But, O, it presses to my memory,
Like damned guilty deeds to sinners' minds:
'Tybalt is dead, and Romeo--banished;'
That 'banished,' that one word 'banished,'
Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt's death
Was woe enough, if it had ended there:
Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship
And needly will be rank'd with other griefs,
Why follow'd not, when she said 'Tybalt's dead,'
Thy father, or thy mother, nay, or both,
Which modern lamentations might have moved?
But with a rear-ward following Tybalt's death,
'Romeo is banished,' to speak that word,
Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,
All slain, all dead. 'Romeo is banished!'
There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,
In that word's death; no words can that woe sound.
Where is my father, and my mother, nurse?

Nurse:
Weeping and wailing over Tybalt's corse:
Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.

JULIET:
Wash they his wounds with tears: mine shall be spent,
When theirs are dry, for Romeo's banishment.
Take up those cords: poor ropes, you are beguiled,
Both you and I; for Romeo is exiled:
He made you for a highway to my bed;
But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.
Come, cords, come, nurse; I'll to my wedding-bed;
And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!

Nurse:
Hie to your chamber: I'll find Romeo
To comfort you: I wot well where he is.
Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night:
I'll to him; he is hid at Laurence' cell.

JULIET:
O, find him! give this ring to my true knight,
And bid him come to take his last farewell.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man:
Affliction is enamour'd of thy parts,
And thou art wedded to calamity.

ROMEO:
Father, what news? what is the prince's doom?
What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand,
That I yet know not?

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Too familiar
Is my dear son with such sour company:
I bring thee tidings of the prince's doom.

ROMEO:
What less than dooms-day is the prince's doom?

FRIAR LAURENCE:
A gentler judgment vanish'd from his lips,
Not body's death, but body's banishment.

ROMEO:
Ha, banishment! be merciful, say 'death;'
For exile hath more terror in his look,
Much more than death: do not say 'banishment.'

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Hence from Verona art thou banished:
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.

ROMEO:
There is no world without Verona walls,
But purgatory, torture, hell itself.
Hence-banished is banish'd from the world,
And world's exile is death: then banished,
Is death mis-term'd: calling death banishment,
Thou cutt'st my head off with a golden axe,
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
O deadly sin! O rude unthankfulness!
Thy fault our law calls death; but the kind prince,
Taking thy part, hath rush'd aside the law,
And turn'd that black word death to banishment:
This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.

ROMEO:
'Tis torture, and not mercy: heaven is here,
Where Juliet lives; and every cat and dog
And little mouse, every unworthy thing,
Live here in heaven and may look on her;
But Romeo may not: more validity,
More honourable state, more courtship lives
In carrion-flies than Romeo: they my seize
On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand
And steal immortal blessing from her lips,
Who even in pure and vestal modesty,
Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin;
But Romeo may not; he is banished:
Flies may do this, but I from this must fly:
They are free men, but I am banished.
And say'st thou yet that exile is not death?
Hadst thou no poison mix'd, no sharp-ground knife,
No sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean,
But 'banished' to kill me?--'banished'?
O friar, the damned use that word in hell;
Howlings attend it: how hast thou the heart,
Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,
A sin-absolver, and my friend profess'd,
To mangle me with that word 'banished'?

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Thou fond mad man, hear me but speak a word.

ROMEO:
O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
I'll give thee armour to keep off that word:
Adversity's sweet milk, philosophy,
To comfort thee, though thou art banished.

ROMEO:
Yet 'banished'? Hang up philosophy!
Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,
Displant a town, reverse a prince's doom,
It helps not, it prevails not: talk no more.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
O, then I see that madmen have no ears.

ROMEO:
How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.

ROMEO:
Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel:
Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,
Doting like me and like me banished,
Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair,
And fall upon the ground, as I do now,
Taking the measure of an unmade grave.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Arise; one knocks; good Romeo, hide thyself.

ROMEO:
Not I; unless the breath of heartsick groans,
Mist-like, infold me from the search of eyes.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Hark, how they knock! Who's there? Romeo, arise;
Thou wilt be taken. Stay awhile! Stand up;
Run to my study. By and by! God's will,
What simpleness is this! I come, I come!
Who knocks so hard? whence come you? what's your will?

Nurse:

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Welcome, then.

Nurse:
O holy friar, O, tell me, holy friar,
Where is my lady's lord, where's Romeo?

FRIAR LAURENCE:
There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.

Nurse:
O, he is even in my mistress' case,
Just in her case! O woful sympathy!
Piteous predicament! Even so lies she,
Blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering.
Stand up, stand up; stand, and you be a man:
For Juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand;
Why should you fall into so deep an O?

ROMEO:
Nurse!

Nurse:
Ah sir! ah sir! Well, death's the end of all.

ROMEO:
Spakest thou of Juliet? how is it with her?
Doth she not think me an old murderer,
Now I have stain'd the childhood of our joy
With blood removed but little from her own?
Where is she? and how doth she? and what says
My conceal'd lady to our cancell'd love?

Nurse:
O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps;
And now falls on her bed; and then starts up,
And Tybalt calls; and then on Romeo cries,
And then down falls again.

ROMEO:
As if that name,
Shot from the deadly level of a gun,
Did murder her; as that name's cursed hand
Murder'd her kinsman. O, tell me, friar, tell me,
In what vile part of this anatomy
Doth my name lodge? tell me, that I may sack
The hateful mansion.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Hold thy desperate hand:
Art thou a man? thy form cries out thou art:
Thy tears are womanish; thy wild acts denote
The unreasonable fury of a beast:
Unseemly woman in a seeming man!
Or ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
Thou hast amazed me: by my holy order,
I thought thy disposition better temper'd.
Hast thou slain Tybalt? wilt thou slay thyself?
And stay thy lady too that lives in thee,
By doing damned hate upon thyself?
Why rail'st thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth?
Since birth, and heaven, and earth, all three do meet
In thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose.
Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit;
Which, like a usurer, abound'st in all,
And usest none in that true use indeed
Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit:
Thy noble shape is but a form of wax,
Digressing from the valour of a man;
Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,
Killing that love which thou hast vow'd to cherish;
Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,
Misshapen in the conduct of them both,
Like powder in a skitless soldier's flask,
Is set afire by thine own ignorance,
And thou dismember'd with thine own defence.
What, rouse thee, man! thy Juliet is alive,
For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead;
There art thou happy: Tybalt would kill thee,
But thou slew'st Tybalt; there are thou happy too:
The law that threaten'd death becomes thy friend
And turns it to exile; there art thou happy:
A pack of blessings lights up upon thy back;
Happiness courts thee in her best array;
But, like a misbehaved and sullen wench,
Thou pout'st upon thy fortune and thy love:
Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
Go, get thee to thy love, as was decreed,
Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her:
But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
For then thou canst not pass to Mantua;
Where thou shalt live, till we can find a time
To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,
Beg pardon of the prince, and call thee back
With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.
Go before, nurse: commend me to thy lady;
And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto:
Romeo is coming.

Nurse:
O Lord, I could have stay'd here all the night
To hear good counsel: O, what learning is!
My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come.

ROMEO:
Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.

Nurse:
Here, sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir:
Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.

ROMEO:
How well my comfort is revived by this!

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Go hence; good night; and here stands all your state:
Either be gone before the watch be set,
Or by the break of day disguised from hence:
Sojourn in Mantua; I'll find out your man,
And he shall signify from time to time
Every good hap to you that chances here:
Give me thy hand; 'tis late: farewell; good night.

ROMEO:
But that a joy past joy calls out on me,
It were a grief, so brief to part with thee: Farewell.

CAPULET:
Things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily,
That we have had no time to move our daughter:
Look you, she loved her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
And so did I:--Well, we were born to die.
'Tis very late, she'll not come down to-night:
I promise you, but for your company,
I would have been a-bed an hour ago.

PARIS:
These times of woe afford no time to woo.
Madam, good night: commend me to your daughter.

LADY CAPULET:
I will, and know her mind early to-morrow;
To-night she is mew'd up to her heaviness.

CAPULET:
Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
Of my child's love: I think she will be ruled
In all respects by me; nay, more, I doubt it not.
Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed;
Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love;
And bid her, mark you me, on Wednesday next--
But, soft! what day is this?

PARIS:
Monday, my lord,

CAPULET:
Monday! ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon,
O' Thursday let it be: o' Thursday, tell her,
She shall be married to this noble earl.
Will you be ready? do you like this haste?
We'll keep no great ado,--a friend or two;
For, hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
It may be thought we held him carelessly,
Being our kinsman, if we revel much:
Therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends,
And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?

PARIS:
My lord, I would that Thursday were to-morrow.

CAPULET:
Well get you gone: o' Thursday be it, then.
Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed,
Prepare her, wife, against this wedding-day.
Farewell, my lord. Light to my chamber, ho!
Afore me! it is so very very late,
That we may call it early by and by.
Good night.

JULIET:
Wilt thou be gone? it is not yet near day:
It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
That pierced the fearful hollow of thine ear;
Nightly she sings on yon pomegranate-tree:
Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.

ROMEO:
It was the lark, the herald of the morn,
No nightingale: look, love, what envious streaks
Do lace the severing clouds in yonder east:
Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day
Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.
I must be gone and live, or stay and die.

JULIET:
Yon light is not day-light, I know it, I:
It is some meteor that the sun exhales,
To be to thee this night a torch-bearer,
And light thee on thy way to Mantua:
Therefore stay yet; thou need'st not to be gone.

ROMEO:
Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death;
I am content, so thou wilt have it so.
I'll say yon grey is not the morning's eye,
'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow;
Nor that is not the lark, whose notes do beat
The vaulty heaven so high above our heads:
I have more care to stay than will to go:
Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so.
How is't, my soul? let's talk; it is not day.

JULIET:
It is, it is: hie hence, be gone, away!
It is the lark that sings so out of tune,
Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
Some say the lark makes sweet division;
This doth not so, for she divideth us:
Some say the lark and loathed toad change eyes,
O, now I would they had changed voices too!
Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,
Hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day,
O, now be gone; more light and light it grows.

ROMEO:
More light and light; more dark and dark our woes!

Nurse:
Madam!

JULIET:
Nurse?

Nurse:
Your lady mother is coming to your chamber:
The day is broke; be wary, look about.

JULIET:
Then, window, let day in, and let life out.

ROMEO:
Farewell, farewell! one kiss, and I'll descend.

JULIET:
Art thou gone so? love, lord, ay, husband, friend!
I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
For in a minute there are many days:
O, by this count I shall be much in years
Ere I again behold my Romeo!

ROMEO:
Farewell!
I will omit no opportunity
That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.

JULIET:
O think'st thou we shall ever meet again?

ROMEO:
I doubt it not; and all these woes shall serve
For sweet discourses in our time to come.

JULIET:
O God, I have an ill-divining soul!
Methinks I see thee, now thou art below,
As one dead in the bottom of a tomb:
Either my eyesight fails, or thou look'st pale.

ROMEO:
And trust me, love, in my eye so do you:
Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu!

JULIET:
O fortune, fortune! all men call thee fickle:
If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him.
That is renown'd for faith? Be fickle, fortune;
For then, I hope, thou wilt not keep him long,
But send him back.

LADY CAPULET:

JULIET:
Who is't that calls? is it my lady mother?
Is she not down so late, or up so early?
What unaccustom'd cause procures her hither?

LADY CAPULET:
Why, how now, Juliet!

JULIET:
Madam, I am not well.

LADY CAPULET:
Evermore weeping for your cousin's death?
What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live;
Therefore, have done: some grief shows much of love;
But much of grief shows still some want of wit.

JULIET:
Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.

LADY CAPULET:
So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend
Which you weep for.

JULIET:
Feeling so the loss,
Cannot choose but ever weep the friend.

LADY CAPULET:
Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death,
As that the villain lives which slaughter'd him.

JULIET:
What villain madam?

LADY CAPULET:
That same villain, Romeo.

JULIET:

LADY CAPULET:
That is, because the traitor murderer lives.

JULIET:
Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands:
Would none but I might venge my cousin's death!

LADY CAPULET:
We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not:
Then weep no more. I'll send to one in Mantua,
Where that same banish'd runagate doth live,
Shall give him such an unaccustom'd dram,
That he shall soon keep Tybalt company:
And then, I hope, thou wilt be satisfied.

JULIET:
Indeed, I never shall be satisfied
With Romeo, till I behold him--dead--
Is my poor heart for a kinsman vex'd.
Madam, if you could find out but a man
To bear a poison, I would temper it;
That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,
Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors
To hear him named, and cannot come to him.
To wreak the love I bore my cousin
Upon his body that slaughter'd him!

LADY CAPULET:
Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man.
But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.

JULIET:
And joy comes well in such a needy time:
What are they, I beseech your ladyship?

LADY CAPULET:
Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child;
One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,
Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy,
That thou expect'st not nor I look'd not for.

JULIET:
Madam, in happy time, what day is that?

LADY CAPULET:
Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn,
The gallant, young and noble gentleman,
The County Paris, at Saint Peter's Church,
Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.

JULIET:
Now, by Saint Peter's Church and Peter too,
He shall not make me there a joyful bride.
I wonder at this haste; that I must wed
Ere he, that should be husband, comes to woo.
I pray you, tell my lord and father, madam,
I will not marry yet; and, when I do, I swear,
It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!

LADY CAPULET:
Here comes your father; tell him so yourself,
And see how he will take it at your hands.

CAPULET:
When the sun sets, the air doth drizzle dew;
But for the sunset of my brother's son
It rains downright.
How now! a conduit, girl? what, still in tears?
Evermore showering? In one little body
Thou counterfeit'st a bark, a sea, a wind;
For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,
Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is,
Sailing in this salt flood; the winds, thy sighs;
Who, raging with thy tears, and they with them,
Without a sudden calm, will overset
Thy tempest-tossed body. How now, wife!
Have you deliver'd to her our decree?

LADY CAPULET:
Ay, sir; but she will none, she gives you thanks.
I would the fool were married to her grave!

CAPULET:
Soft! take me with you, take me with you, wife.
How! will she none? doth she not give us thanks?
Is she not proud? doth she not count her blest,
Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
So worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom?

JULIET:
Not proud, you have; but thankful, that you have:
Proud can I never be of what I hate;
But thankful even for hate, that is meant love.

CAPULET:
How now, how now, chop-logic! What is this?
'Proud,' and 'I thank you,' and 'I thank you not;'
And yet 'not proud,' mistress minion, you,
Thank me no thankings, nor, proud me no prouds,
But fettle your fine joints 'gainst Thursday next,
To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church,
Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
Out, you green-sickness carrion! out, you baggage!
You tallow-face!

LADY CAPULET:
Fie, fie! what, are you mad?

JULIET:
Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.

CAPULET:
Hang thee, young baggage! disobedient wretch!
I tell thee what: get thee to church o' Thursday,
Or never after look me in the face:
Speak not, reply not, do not answer me;
My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest
That God had lent us but this only child;
But now I see this one is one too much,
And that we have a curse in having her:
Out on her, hilding!

Nurse:
God in heaven bless her!
You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.

CAPULET:
And why, my lady wisdom? hold your tongue,
Good prudence; smatter with your gossips, go.

Nurse:
I speak no treason.

CAPULET:
O, God ye god-den.

Nurse:
May not one speak?

CAPULET:
Peace, you mumbling fool!
Utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl;
For here we need it not.

LADY CAPULET:
You are too hot.

CAPULET:
God's bread! it makes me mad:
Day, night, hour, tide, time, work, play,
Alone, in company, still my care hath been
To have her match'd: and having now provided
A gentleman of noble parentage,
Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly train'd,
Stuff'd, as they say, with honourable parts,
Proportion'd as one's thought would wish a man;
And then to have a wretched puling fool,
A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender,
To answer 'I'll not wed; I cannot love,
I am too young; I pray you, pardon me.'
But, as you will not wed, I'll pardon you:
Graze where you will you shall not house with me:
Look to't, think on't, I do not use to jest.
Thursday is near; lay hand on heart, advise:
An you be mine, I'll give you to my friend;
And you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in
the streets,
For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee,
Nor what is mine shall never do thee good:
Trust to't, bethink you; I'll not be forsworn.

JULIET:
Is there no pity sitting in the clouds,
That sees into the bottom of my grief?
O, sweet my mother, cast me not away!
Delay this marriage for a month, a week;
Or, if you do not, make the bridal bed
In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.

LADY CAPULET:
Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word:
Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.

JULIET:
O God!--O nurse, how shall this be prevented?
My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven;
How shall that faith return again to earth,
Unless that husband send it me from heaven
By leaving earth? comfort me, counsel me.
Alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagems
Upon so soft a subject as myself!
What say'st thou? hast thou not a word of joy?
Some comfort, nurse.

Nurse:
Faith, here it is.
Romeo is banish'd; and all the world to nothing,
That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you;
Or, if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
I think it best you married with the county.
O, he's a lovely gentleman!
Romeo's a dishclout to him: an eagle, madam,
Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,
I think you are happy in this second match,
For it excels your first: or if it did not,
Your first is dead; or 'twere as good he were,
As living here and you no use of him.

JULIET:
Speakest thou from thy heart?

Nurse:
And from my soul too;
Or else beshrew them both.

JULIET:
Amen!

Nurse:
What?

JULIET:
Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much.
Go in: and tell my lady I am gone,
Having displeased my father, to Laurence' cell,
To make confession and to be absolved.

Nurse:
Marry, I will; and this is wisely done.

JULIET:
Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend!
Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,
Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue
Which she hath praised him with above compare
So many thousand times? Go, counsellor;
Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.
I'll to the friar, to know his remedy:
If all else fail, myself have power to die.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
On Thursday, sir? the time is very short.

PARIS:
My father Capulet will have it so;
And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
You say you do not know the lady's mind:
Uneven is the course, I like it not.

PARIS:
Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt's death,
And therefore have I little talk'd of love;
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous
That she doth give her sorrow so much sway,
And in his wisdom hastes our marriage,
To stop the inundation of her tears;
Which, too much minded by herself alone,
May be put from her by society:
Now do you know the reason of this haste.

FRIAR LAURENCE:

PARIS:
Happily met, my lady and my wife!

JULIET:
That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.

PARIS:
That may be must be, love, on Thursday next.

JULIET:
What must be shall be.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
That's a certain text.

PARIS:
Come you to make confession to this father?

JULIET:
To answer that, I should confess to you.

PARIS:
Do not deny to him that you love me.

JULIET:
I will confess to you that I love him.

PARIS:
So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.

JULIET:
If I do so, it will be of more price,
Being spoke behind your back, than to your face.

PARIS:
Poor soul, thy face is much abused with tears.

JULIET:
The tears have got small victory by that;
For it was bad enough before their spite.

PARIS:
Thou wrong'st it, more than tears, with that report.

JULIET:
That is no slander, sir, which is a truth;
And what I spake, I spake it to my face.

PARIS:
Thy face is mine, and thou hast slander'd it.

JULIET:
It may be so, for it is not mine own.
Are you at leisure, holy father, now;
Or shall I come to you at evening mass?

FRIAR LAURENCE:
My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.
My lord, we must entreat the time alone.

PARIS:
God shield I should disturb devotion!
Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye:
Till then, adieu; and keep this holy kiss.

JULIET:
O shut the door! and when thou hast done so,
Come weep with me; past hope, past cure, past help!

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Ah, Juliet, I already know thy grief;
It strains me past the compass of my wits:
I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,
On Thursday next be married to this county.

JULIET:
Tell me not, friar, that thou hear'st of this,
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it:
If, in thy wisdom, thou canst give no help,
Do thou but call my resolution wise,
And with this knife I'll help it presently.
God join'd my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands;
And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo seal'd,
Shall be the label to another deed,
Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
Turn to another, this shall slay them both:
Therefore, out of thy long-experienced time,
Give me some present counsel, or, behold,
'Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife
Shall play the umpire, arbitrating that
Which the commission of thy years and art
Could to no issue of true honour bring.
Be not so long to speak; I long to die,
If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Hold, daughter: I do spy a kind of hope,
Which craves as desperate an execution.
As that is desperate which we would prevent.
If, rather than to marry County Paris,
Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,
Then is it likely thou wilt undertake
A thing like death to chide away this shame,
That copest with death himself to scape from it:
And, if thou darest, I'll give thee remedy.

JULIET:
O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
From off the battlements of yonder tower;
Or walk in thievish ways; or bid me lurk
Where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears;
Or shut me nightly in a charnel-house,
O'er-cover'd quite with dead men's rattling bones,
With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls;
Or bid me go into a new-made grave
And hide me with a dead man in his shroud;
Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble;
And I will do it without fear or doubt,
To live an unstain'd wife to my sweet love.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Hold, then; go home, be merry, give consent
To marry Paris: Wednesday is to-morrow:
To-morrow night look that thou lie alone;
Let not thy nurse lie with thee in thy chamber:
Take thou this vial, being then in bed,
And this distilled liquor drink thou off;
When presently through all thy veins shall run
A cold and drowsy humour, for no pulse
Shall keep his native progress, but surcease:
No warmth, no breath, shall testify thou livest;
The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
To paly ashes, thy eyes' windows fall,
Like death, when he shuts up the day of life;
Each part, deprived of supple government,
Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death:
And in this borrow'd likeness of shrunk death
Thou shalt continue two and forty hours,
And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes
To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead:
Then, as the manner of our country is,
In thy best robes uncover'd on the bier
Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault
Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.
In the mean time, against thou shalt awake,
Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift,
And hither shall he come: and he and I
Will watch thy waking, and that very night
Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
And this shall free thee from this present shame;
If no inconstant toy, nor womanish fear,
Abate thy valour in the acting it.

JULIET:
Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Hold; get you gone, be strong and prosperous
In this resolve: I'll send a friar with speed
To Mantua, with my letters to thy lord.

JULIET:
Love give me strength! and strength shall help afford.
Farewell, dear father!

CAPULET:
So many guests invite as here are writ.
Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.

Second Servant:
You shall have none ill, sir; for I'll try if they
can lick their fingers.

CAPULET:
How canst thou try them so?

Second Servant:
Marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick his
own fingers: therefore he that cannot lick his
fingers goes not with me.

CAPULET:
Go, be gone.
We shall be much unfurnished for this time.
What, is my daughter gone to Friar Laurence?

Nurse:
Ay, forsooth.

CAPULET:
Well, he may chance to do some good on her:
A peevish self-will'd harlotry it is.

Nurse:
See where she comes from shrift with merry look.

CAPULET:
How now, my headstrong! where have you been gadding?

JULIET:
Where I have learn'd me to repent the sin
Of disobedient opposition
To you and your behests, and am enjoin'd
By holy Laurence to fall prostrate here,
And beg your pardon: pardon, I beseech you!
Henceforward I am ever ruled by you.

CAPULET:
Send for the county; go tell him of this:
I'll have this knot knit up to-morrow morning.

JULIET:
I met the youthful lord at Laurence' cell;
And gave him what becomed love I might,
Not step o'er the bounds of modesty.

CAPULET:
Why, I am glad on't; this is well: stand up:
This is as't should be. Let me see the county;
Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.
Now, afore God! this reverend holy friar,
Our whole city is much bound to him.

JULIET:
Nurse, will you go with me into my closet,
To help me sort such needful ornaments
As you think fit to furnish me to-morrow?

LADY CAPULET:
No, not till Thursday; there is time enough.

CAPULET:
Go, nurse, go with her: we'll to church to-morrow.

LADY  CAPULET:
We shall be short in our provision:
'Tis now near night.

CAPULET:
Tush, I will stir about,
And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife:
Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her;
I'll not to bed to-night; let me alone;
I'll play the housewife for this once. What, ho!
They are all forth. Well, I will walk myself
To County Paris, to prepare him up
Against to-morrow: my heart is wondrous light,
Since this same wayward girl is so reclaim'd.

JULIET:
Ay, those attires are best: but, gentle nurse,
I pray thee, leave me to myself to-night,
For I have need of many orisons
To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
Which, well thou know'st, is cross, and full of sin.

LADY CAPULET:
What, are you busy, ho? need you my help?

JULIET:
No, madam; we have cull'd such necessaries
As are behoveful for our state to-morrow:
So please you, let me now be left alone,
And let the nurse this night sit up with you;
For, I am sure, you have your hands full all,
In this so sudden business.

LADY CAPULET:
Good night:
Get thee to bed, and rest; for thou hast need.

JULIET:
Farewell! God knows when we shall meet again.
I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins,
That almost freezes up the heat of life:
I'll call them back again to comfort me:
Nurse! What should she do here?
My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
Come, vial.
What if this mixture do not work at all?
Shall I be married then to-morrow morning?
No, no: this shall forbid it: lie thou there.
What if it be a poison, which the friar
Subtly hath minister'd to have me dead,
Lest in this marriage he should be dishonour'd,
Because he married me before to Romeo?
I fear it is: and yet, methinks, it should not,
For he hath still been tried a holy man.
How if, when I am laid into the tomb,
I wake before the time that Romeo
Come to redeem me? there's a fearful point!
Shall I not, then, be stifled in the vault,
To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?
Or, if I live, is it not very like,
The horrible conceit of death and night,
Together with the terror of the place,--
As in a vault, an ancient receptacle,
Where, for these many hundred years, the bones
Of all my buried ancestors are packed:
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
Lies festering in his shroud; where, as they say,
At some hours in the night spirits resort;--
Alack, alack, is it not like that I,
So early waking, what with loathsome smells,
And shrieks like mandrakes' torn out of the earth,
That living mortals, hearing them, run mad:--
O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,
Environed with all these hideous fears?
And madly play with my forefather's joints?
And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud?
And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone,
As with a club, dash out my desperate brains?
O, look! methinks I see my cousin's ghost
Seeking out Romeo, that did spit his body
Upon a rapier's point: stay, Tybalt, stay!
Romeo, I come! this do I drink to thee.

LADY CAPULET:
Hold, take these keys, and fetch more spices, nurse.

Nurse:
They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.

CAPULET:
Come, stir, stir, stir! the second cock hath crow'd,
The curfew-bell hath rung, 'tis three o'clock:
Look to the baked meats, good Angelica:
Spare not for the cost.

Nurse:
Go, you cot-quean, go,
Get you to bed; faith, You'll be sick to-morrow
For this night's watching.

CAPULET:
No, not a whit: what! I have watch'd ere now
All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.

LADY CAPULET:
Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time;
But I will watch you from such watching now.

CAPULET:
A jealous hood, a jealous hood!
Now, fellow,
What's there?

First Servant:
Things for the cook, sir; but I know not what.

CAPULET:
Make haste, make haste.
Sirrah, fetch drier logs:
Call Peter, he will show thee where they are.

Second Servant:
I have a head, sir, that will find out logs,
And never trouble Peter for the matter.

CAPULET:
Mass, and well said; a merry whoreson, ha!
Thou shalt be logger-head. Good faith, 'tis day:
The county will be here with music straight,
For so he said he would: I hear him near.
Nurse! Wife! What, ho! What, nurse, I say!
Go waken Juliet, go and trim her up;
I'll go and chat with Paris: hie, make haste,
Make haste; the bridegroom he is come already:
Make haste, I say.

Nurse:
Mistress! what, mistress! Juliet! fast, I warrant her, she:
Why, lamb! why, lady! fie, you slug-a-bed!
Why, love, I say! madam! sweet-heart! why, bride!
What, not a word? you take your pennyworths now;
Sleep for a week; for the next night, I warrant,
The County Paris hath set up his rest,
That you shall rest but little. God forgive me,
Marry, and amen, how sound is she asleep!
I must needs wake her. Madam, madam, madam!
Ay, let the county take you in your bed;
He'll fright you up, i' faith. Will it not be?
What, dress'd! and in your clothes! and down again!
I must needs wake you; Lady! lady! lady!
Alas, alas! Help, help! my lady's dead!
O, well-a-day, that ever I was born!
Some aqua vitae, ho! My lord! my lady!

LADY CAPULET:
What noise is here?

Nurse:
O lamentable day!

LADY CAPULET:
What is the matter?

Nurse:
Look, look! O heavy day!

LADY CAPULET:
O me, O me! My child, my only life,
Revive, look up, or I will die with thee!
Help, help! Call help.

CAPULET:
For shame, bring Juliet forth; her lord is come.

Nurse:
She's dead, deceased, she's dead; alack the day!

LADY CAPULET:
Alack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!

CAPULET:
Ha! let me see her: out, alas! she's cold:
Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff;
Life and these lips have long been separated:
Death lies on her like an untimely frost
Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.

Nurse:
O lamentable day!

LADY CAPULET:
O woful time!

CAPULET:
Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail,
Ties up my tongue, and will not let me speak.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Come, is the bride ready to go to church?

CAPULET:
Ready to go, but never to return.
O son! the night before thy wedding-day
Hath Death lain with thy wife. There she lies,
Flower as she was, deflowered by him.
Death is my son-in-law, Death is my heir;
My daughter he hath wedded: I will die,
And leave him all; life, living, all is Death's.

PARIS:
Have I thought long to see this morning's face,
And doth it give me such a sight as this?

LADY CAPULET:
Accursed, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!
Most miserable hour that e'er time saw
In lasting labour of his pilgrimage!
But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,
But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
And cruel death hath catch'd it from my sight!

Nurse:
O woe! O woful, woful, woful day!
Most lamentable day, most woful day,
That ever, ever, I did yet behold!
O day! O day! O day! O hateful day!
Never was seen so black a day as this:
O woful day, O woful day!

PARIS:
Beguiled, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!
Most detestable death, by thee beguil'd,
By cruel cruel thee quite overthrown!
O love! O life! not life, but love in death!

CAPULET:
Despised, distressed, hated, martyr'd, kill'd!
Uncomfortable time, why camest thou now
To murder, murder our solemnity?
O child! O child! my soul, and not my child!
Dead art thou! Alack! my child is dead;
And with my child my joys are buried.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Peace, ho, for shame! confusion's cure lives not
In these confusions. Heaven and yourself
Had part in this fair maid; now heaven hath all,
And all the better is it for the maid:
Your part in her you could not keep from death,
But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.
The most you sought was her promotion;
For 'twas your heaven she should be advanced:
And weep ye now, seeing she is advanced
Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
O, in this love, you love your child so ill,
That you run mad, seeing that she is well:
She's not well married that lives married long;
But she's best married that dies married young.
Dry up your tears, and stick your rosemary
On this fair corse; and, as the custom is,
In all her best array bear her to church:
For though fond nature bids us an lament,
Yet nature's tears are reason's merriment.

CAPULET:
All things that we ordained festival,
Turn from their office to black funeral;
Our instruments to melancholy bells,
Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast,
Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change,
Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse,
And all things change them to the contrary.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Sir, go you in; and, madam, go with him;
And go, Sir Paris; every one prepare
To follow this fair corse unto her grave:
The heavens do lour upon you for some ill;
Move them no more by crossing their high will.

First Musician:
Faith, we may put up our pipes, and be gone.

Nurse:
Honest goodfellows, ah, put up, put up;
For, well you know, this is a pitiful case.

First Musician:
Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.

PETER:
Musicians, O, musicians, 'Heart's ease, Heart's
ease:' O, an you will have me live, play 'Heart's ease.'

First Musician:
Why 'Heart's ease?'

PETER:
O, musicians, because my heart itself plays 'My
heart is full of woe:' O, play me some merry dump,
to comfort me.

First Musician:
Not a dump we; 'tis no time to play now.

PETER:
You will not, then?

First Musician:
No.

PETER:
I will then give it you soundly.

First Musician:
What will you give us?

PETER:
No money, on my faith, but the gleek;
I will give you the minstrel.

First Musician:
Then I will give you the serving-creature.

PETER:
Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on
your pate. I will carry no crotchets: I'll re you,
I'll fa you; do you note me?

First Musician:
An you re us and fa us, you note us.

Second Musician:
Pray you, put up your dagger, and put out your wit.

PETER:
Then have at you with my wit! I will dry-beat you
with an iron wit, and put up my iron dagger. Answer
me like men:
'When griping grief the heart doth wound,
And doleful dumps the mind oppress,
Then music with her silver sound'--
why 'silver sound'? why 'music with her silver
sound'? What say you, Simon Catling?

Musician:
Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.

PETER:
Pretty! What say you, Hugh Rebeck?

Second Musician:
I say 'silver sound,' because musicians sound for silver.

PETER:
Pretty too! What say you, James Soundpost?

Third Musician:
Faith, I know not what to say.

PETER:
O, I cry you mercy; you are the singer: I will say
for you. It is 'music with her silver sound,'
because musicians have no gold for sounding:
'Then music with her silver sound
With speedy help doth lend redress.'

First Musician:
What a pestilent knave is this same!

Second Musician:
Hang him, Jack! Come, we'll in here; tarry for the
mourners, and stay dinner.

ROMEO:
If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep,
My dreams presage some joyful news at hand:
My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne;
And all this day an unaccustom'd spirit
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
I dreamt my lady came and found me dead--
Strange dream, that gives a dead man leave
to think!--
And breathed such life with kisses in my lips,
That I revived, and was an emperor.
Ah me! how sweet is love itself possess'd,
When but love's shadows are so rich in joy!
News from Verona!--How now, Balthasar!
Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar?
How doth my lady? Is my father well?
How fares my Juliet? that I ask again;
For nothing can be ill, if she be well.

BALTHASAR:
Then she is well, and nothing can be ill:
Her body sleeps in Capel's monument,
And her immortal part with angels lives.
I saw her laid low in her kindred's vault,
And presently took post to tell it you:
O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,
Since you did leave it for my office, sir.

ROMEO:
Is it even so? then I defy you, stars!
Thou know'st my lodging: get me ink and paper,
And hire post-horses; I will hence to-night.

BALTHASAR:
I do beseech you, sir, have patience:
Your looks are pale and wild, and do import
Some misadventure.

ROMEO:
Tush, thou art deceived:
Leave me, and do the thing I bid thee do.
Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?

BALTHASAR:
No, my good lord.

ROMEO:
No matter: get thee gone,
And hire those horses; I'll be with thee straight.
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee to-night.
Let's see for means: O mischief, thou art swift
To enter in the thoughts of desperate men!
I do remember an apothecary,--
And hereabouts he dwells,--which late I noted
In tatter'd weeds, with overwhelming brows,
Culling of simples; meagre were his looks,
Sharp misery had worn him to the bones:
And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,
An alligator stuff'd, and other skins
Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves
A beggarly account of empty boxes,
Green earthen pots, bladders and musty seeds,
Remnants of packthread and old cakes of roses,
Were thinly scatter'd, to make up a show.
Noting this penury, to myself I said
'An if a man did need a poison now,
Whose sale is present death in Mantua,
Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.'
O, this same thought did but forerun my need;
And this same needy man must sell it me.
As I remember, this should be the house.
Being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut.
What, ho! apothecary!

Apothecary:
Who calls so loud?

ROMEO:
Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor:
Hold, there is forty ducats: let me have
A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear
As will disperse itself through all the veins
That the life-weary taker may fall dead
And that the trunk may be discharged of breath
As violently as hasty powder fired
Doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.

Apothecary:
Such mortal drugs I have; but Mantua's law
Is death to any he that utters them.

ROMEO:
Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness,
And fear'st to die? famine is in thy cheeks,
Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes,
Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back;
The world is not thy friend nor the world's law;
The world affords no law to make thee rich;
Then be not poor, but break it, and take this.

Apothecary:
My poverty, but not my will, consents.

ROMEO:
I pay thy poverty, and not thy will.

Apothecary:
Put this in any liquid thing you will,
And drink it off; and, if you had the strength
Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.

ROMEO:
There is thy gold, worse poison to men's souls,
Doing more murders in this loathsome world,
Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell.
I sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none.
Farewell: buy food, and get thyself in flesh.
Come, cordial and not poison, go with me
To Juliet's grave; for there must I use thee.

FRIAR JOHN:
Holy Franciscan friar! brother, ho!

FRIAR LAURENCE:
This same should be the voice of Friar John.
Welcome from Mantua: what says Romeo?
Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.

FRIAR JOHN:
Going to find a bare-foot brother out
One of our order, to associate me,
Here in this city visiting the sick,
And finding him, the searchers of the town,
Suspecting that we both were in a house
Where the infectious pestilence did reign,
Seal'd up the doors, and would not let us forth;
So that my speed to Mantua there was stay'd.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?

FRIAR JOHN:
I could not send it,--here it is again,--
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
So fearful were they of infection.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Unhappy fortune! by my brotherhood,
The letter was not nice but full of charge
Of dear import, and the neglecting it
May do much danger. Friar John, go hence;
Get me an iron crow, and bring it straight
Unto my cell.

FRIAR JOHN:
Brother, I'll go and bring it thee.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Now must I to the monument alone;
Within three hours will fair Juliet wake:
She will beshrew me much that Romeo
Hath had no notice of these accidents;
But I will write again to Mantua,
And keep her at my cell till Romeo come;
Poor living corse, closed in a dead man's tomb!

PARIS:
Give me thy torch, boy: hence, and stand aloof:
Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.
Under yond yew-trees lay thee all along,
Holding thine ear close to the hollow ground;
So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread,
Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves,
But thou shalt hear it: whistle then to me,
As signal that thou hear'st something approach.
Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.

PAGE:

PARIS:
Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew,--
O woe! thy canopy is dust and stones;--
Which with sweet water nightly I will dew,
Or, wanting that, with tears distill'd by moans:
The obsequies that I for thee will keep
Nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.
The boy gives warning something doth approach.
What cursed foot wanders this way to-night,
To cross my obsequies and true love's rite?
What with a torch! muffle me, night, awhile.

ROMEO:
Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.
Hold, take this letter; early in the morning
See thou deliver it to my lord and father.
Give me the light: upon thy life, I charge thee,
Whate'er thou hear'st or seest, stand all aloof,
And do not interrupt me in my course.
Why I descend into this bed of death,
Is partly to behold my lady's face;
But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger
A precious ring, a ring that I must use
In dear employment: therefore hence, be gone:
But if thou, jealous, dost return to pry
In what I further shall intend to do,
By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint
And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs:
The time and my intents are savage-wild,
More fierce and more inexorable far
Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.

BALTHASAR:
I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.

ROMEO:
So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that:
Live, and be prosperous: and farewell, good fellow.

BALTHASAR:

ROMEO:
Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,
Gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth,
Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,
And, in despite, I'll cram thee with more food!

PARIS:
This is that banish'd haughty Montague,
That murder'd my love's cousin, with which grief,
It is supposed, the fair creature died;
And here is come to do some villanous shame
To the dead bodies: I will apprehend him.
Stop thy unhallow'd toil, vile Montague!
Can vengeance be pursued further than death?
Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee:
Obey, and go with me; for thou must die.

ROMEO:
I must indeed; and therefore came I hither.
Good gentle youth, tempt not a desperate man;
Fly hence, and leave me: think upon these gone;
Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth,
Put not another sin upon my head,
By urging me to fury: O, be gone!
By heaven, I love thee better than myself;
For I come hither arm'd against myself:
Stay not, be gone; live, and hereafter say,
A madman's mercy bade thee run away.

PARIS:
I do defy thy conjurations,
And apprehend thee for a felon here.

ROMEO:
Wilt thou provoke me? then have at thee, boy!

PAGE:
O Lord, they fight! I will go call the watch.

PARIS:
O, I am slain!
If thou be merciful,
Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet.

ROMEO:
In faith, I will. Let me peruse this face.
Mercutio's kinsman, noble County Paris!
What said my man, when my betossed soul
Did not attend him as we rode? I think
He told me Paris should have married Juliet:
Said he not so? or did I dream it so?
Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet,
To think it was so? O, give me thy hand,
One writ with me in sour misfortune's book!
I'll bury thee in a triumphant grave;
A grave? O no! a lantern, slaughter'd youth,
For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
This vault a feasting presence full of light.
Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interr'd.


--- End of file: shakespear_10.txt ---

How oft when men are at the point of death
Have they been merry! which their keepers call
A lightning before death: O, how may I
Call this a lightning? O my love! my wife!
Death, that hath suck'd the honey of thy breath,
Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty:
Thou art not conquer'd; beauty's ensign yet
Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,
And death's pale flag is not advanced there.
Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?
O, what more favour can I do to thee,
Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain
To sunder his that was thine enemy?
Forgive me, cousin! Ah, dear Juliet,
Why art thou yet so fair? shall I believe
That unsubstantial death is amorous,
And that the lean abhorred monster keeps
Thee here in dark to be his paramour?
For fear of that, I still will stay with thee;
And never from this palace of dim night
Depart again: here, here will I remain
With worms that are thy chamber-maids; O, here
Will I set up my everlasting rest,
And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes, look your last!
Arms, take your last embrace! and, lips, O you
The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
A dateless bargain to engrossing death!
Come, bitter conduct, come, unsavoury guide!
Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on
The dashing rocks thy sea-sick weary bark!
Here's to my love!
O true apothecary!
Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Saint Francis be my speed! how oft to-night
Have my old feet stumbled at graves! Who's there?

BALTHASAR:
Here's one, a friend, and one that knows you well.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Bliss be upon you! Tell me, good my friend,
What torch is yond, that vainly lends his light
To grubs and eyeless skulls? as I discern,
It burneth in the Capel's monument.

BALTHASAR:
It doth so, holy sir; and there's my master,
One that you love.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Who is it?

BALTHASAR:
Romeo.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
How long hath he been there?

BALTHASAR:
Full half an hour.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Go with me to the vault.

BALTHASAR:
I dare not, sir
My master knows not but I am gone hence;
And fearfully did menace me with death,
If I did stay to look on his intents.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Stay, then; I'll go alone. Fear comes upon me:
O, much I fear some ill unlucky thing.

BALTHASAR:
As I did sleep under this yew-tree here,
I dreamt my master and another fought,
And that my master slew him.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Romeo!
Alack, alack, what blood is this, which stains
The stony entrance of this sepulchre?
What mean these masterless and gory swords
To lie discolour'd by this place of peace?
Romeo! O, pale! Who else? what, Paris too?
And steep'd in blood? Ah, what an unkind hour
Is guilty of this lamentable chance!
The lady stirs.

JULIET:
O comfortable friar! where is my lord?
I do remember well where I should be,
And there I am. Where is my Romeo?

FRIAR LAURENCE:
I hear some noise. Lady, come from that nest
Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep:
A greater power than we can contradict
Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away.
Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead;
And Paris too. Come, I'll dispose of thee
Among a sisterhood of holy nuns:
Stay not to question, for the watch is coming;
Come, go, good Juliet,
I dare no longer stay.

JULIET:
Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.
What's here? a cup, closed in my true love's hand?
Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end:
O churl! drunk all, and left no friendly drop
To help me after? I will kiss thy lips;
Haply some poison yet doth hang on them,
To make die with a restorative.
Thy lips are warm.

First Watchman:

JULIET:
Yea, noise? then I'll be brief. O happy dagger!
This is thy sheath;
there rust, and let me die.

PAGE:
This is the place; there, where the torch doth burn.

First Watchman:
The ground is bloody; search about the churchyard:
Go, some of you, whoe'er you find attach.
Pitiful sight! here lies the county slain,
And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,
Who here hath lain these two days buried.
Go, tell the prince: run to the Capulets:
Raise up the Montagues: some others search:
We see the ground whereon these woes do lie;
But the true ground of all these piteous woes
We cannot without circumstance descry.

Second Watchman:
Here's Romeo's man; we found him in the churchyard.

First Watchman:
Hold him in safety, till the prince come hither.

Third Watchman:
Here is a friar, that trembles, sighs and weeps:
We took this mattock and this spade from him,
As he was coming from this churchyard side.

First Watchman:
A great suspicion: stay the friar too.

PRINCE:
What misadventure is so early up,
That calls our person from our morning's rest?

CAPULET:
What should it be, that they so shriek abroad?

LADY CAPULET:
The people in the street cry Romeo,
Some Juliet, and some Paris; and all run,
With open outcry toward our monument.

PRINCE:
What fear is this which startles in our ears?

First Watchman:
Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain;
And Romeo dead; and Juliet, dead before,
Warm and new kill'd.

PRINCE:
Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.

First Watchman:
Here is a friar, and slaughter'd Romeo's man;
With instruments upon them, fit to open
These dead men's tombs.

CAPULET:
O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!
This dagger hath mista'en--for, lo, his house
Is empty on the back of Montague,--
And it mis-sheathed in my daughter's bosom!

LADY CAPULET:
O me! this sight of death is as a bell,
That warns my old age to a sepulchre.

PRINCE:
Come, Montague; for thou art early up,
To see thy son and heir more early down.

MONTAGUE:
Alas, my liege, my wife is dead to-night;
Grief of my son's exile hath stopp'd her breath:
What further woe conspires against mine age?

PRINCE:
Look, and thou shalt see.

MONTAGUE:
O thou untaught! what manners is in this?
To press before thy father to a grave?

PRINCE:
Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,
Till we can clear these ambiguities,
And know their spring, their head, their
true descent;
And then will I be general of your woes,
And lead you even to death: meantime forbear,
And let mischance be slave to patience.
Bring forth the parties of suspicion.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
I am the greatest, able to do least,
Yet most suspected, as the time and place
Doth make against me of this direful murder;
And here I stand, both to impeach and purge
Myself condemned and myself excused.

PRINCE:
Then say at once what thou dost know in this.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
I will be brief, for my short date of breath
Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet;
And she, there dead, that Romeo's faithful wife:
I married them; and their stol'n marriage-day
Was Tybalt's dooms-day, whose untimely death
Banish'd the new-made bridegroom from the city,
For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pined.
You, to remove that siege of grief from her,
Betroth'd and would have married her perforce
To County Paris: then comes she to me,
And, with wild looks, bid me devise some mean
To rid her from this second marriage,
Or in my cell there would she kill herself.
Then gave I her, so tutor'd by my art,
A sleeping potion; which so took effect
As I intended, for it wrought on her
The form of death: meantime I writ to Romeo,
That he should hither come as this dire night,
To help to take her from her borrow'd grave,
Being the time the potion's force should cease.
But he which bore my letter, Friar John,
Was stay'd by accident, and yesternight
Return'd my letter back. Then all alone
At the prefixed hour of her waking,
Came I to take her from her kindred's vault;
Meaning to keep her closely at my cell,
Till I conveniently could send to Romeo:
But when I came, some minute ere the time
Of her awaking, here untimely lay
The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.
She wakes; and I entreated her come forth,
And bear this work of heaven with patience:
But then a noise did scare me from the tomb;
And she, too desperate, would not go with me,
But, as it seems, did violence on herself.
All this I know; and to the marriage
Her nurse is privy: and, if aught in this
Miscarried by my fault, let my old life
Be sacrificed, some hour before his time,
Unto the rigour of severest law.

PRINCE:
We still have known thee for a holy man.
Where's Romeo's man? what can he say in this?

BALTHASAR:
I brought my master news of Juliet's death;
And then in post he came from Mantua
To this same place, to this same monument.
This letter he early bid me give his father,
And threatened me with death, going in the vault,
I departed not and left him there.

PRINCE:
Give me the letter; I will look on it.
Where is the county's page, that raised the watch?
Sirrah, what made your master in this place?

PAGE:
He came with flowers to strew his lady's grave;
And bid me stand aloof, and so I did:
Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb;
And by and by my master drew on him;
And then I ran away to call the watch.

PRINCE:
This letter doth make good the friar's words,
Their course of love, the tidings of her death:
And here he writes that he did buy a poison
Of a poor 'pothecary, and therewithal
Came to this vault to die, and lie with Juliet.
Where be these enemies? Capulet! Montague!
See, what a scourge is laid upon your hate,
That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love.
And I for winking at your discords too
Have lost a brace of kinsmen: all are punish'd.

CAPULET:
O brother Montague, give me thy hand:
This is my daughter's jointure, for no more
Can I demand.

MONTAGUE:
But I can give thee more:
For I will raise her statue in pure gold;
That while Verona by that name is known,
There shall no figure at such rate be set
As that of true and faithful Juliet.

CAPULET:
As rich shall Romeo's by his lady's lie;
Poor sacrifices of our enmity!

PRINCE:
A glooming peace this morning with it brings;
The sun, for sorrow, will not show his head:
Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things;
Some shall be pardon'd, and some punished:
For never was a story of more woe
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.

WARWICK:
I wonder how the king escaped our hands.

YORK:
While we pursued the horsemen of the north,
He slily stole away and left his men:
Whereat the great Lord of Northumberland,
Whose warlike ears could never brook retreat,
Cheer'd up the drooping army; and himself,
Lord Clifford and Lord Stafford, all abreast,
Charged our main battle's front, and breaking in
Were by the swords of common soldiers slain.

EDWARD:
Lord Stafford's father, Duke of Buckingham,
Is either slain or wounded dangerously;
I cleft his beaver with a downright blow:
That this is true, father, behold his blood.

MONTAGUE:
And, brother, here's the Earl of Wiltshire's blood,
Whom I encounter'd as the battles join'd.

RICHARD:
Speak thou for me and tell them what I did.

YORK:
Richard hath best deserved of all my sons.
But is your grace dead, my Lord of Somerset?

NORFOLK:
Such hope have all the line of John of Gaunt!

RICHARD:
Thus do I hope to shake King Henry's head.

WARWICK:
And so do I. Victorious Prince of York,
Before I see thee seated in that throne
Which now the house of Lancaster usurps,
I vow by heaven these eyes shall never close.
This is the palace of the fearful king,
And this the regal seat: possess it, York;
For this is thine and not King Henry's heirs'

YORK:
Assist me, then, sweet Warwick, and I will;
For hither we have broken in by force.

NORFOLK:
We'll all assist you; he that flies shall die.

YORK:
Thanks, gentle Norfolk: stay by me, my lords;
And, soldiers, stay and lodge by me this night.

WARWICK:
And when the king comes, offer no violence,
Unless he seek to thrust you out perforce.

YORK:
The queen this day here holds her parliament,
But little thinks we shall be of her council:
By words or blows here let us win our right.

RICHARD:
Arm'd as we are, let's stay within this house.

WARWICK:
The bloody parliament shall this be call'd,
Unless Plantagenet, Duke of York, be king,
And bashful Henry deposed, whose cowardice
Hath made us by-words to our enemies.

YORK:
Then leave me not, my lords; be resolute;
I mean to take possession of my right.

WARWICK:
Neither the king, nor he that loves him best,
The proudest he that holds up Lancaster,
Dares stir a wing, if Warwick shake his bells.
I'll plant Plantagenet, root him up who dares:
Resolve thee, Richard; claim the English crown.

KING HENRY VI:
My lords, look where the sturdy rebel sits,
Even in the chair of state: belike he means,
Back'd by the power of Warwick, that false peer,
To aspire unto the crown and reign as king.
Earl of Northumberland, he slew thy father.
And thine, Lord Clifford; and you both have vow'd revenge
On him, his sons, his favourites and his friends.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
If I be not, heavens be revenged on me!

CLIFFORD:
The hope thereof makes Clifford mourn in steel.

WESTMORELAND:
What, shall we suffer this? let's pluck him down:
My heart for anger burns; I cannot brook it.

KING HENRY VI:
Be patient, gentle Earl of Westmoreland.

CLIFFORD:
Patience is for poltroons, such as he:
He durst not sit there, had your father lived.
My gracious lord, here in the parliament
Let us assail the family of York.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Well hast thou spoken, cousin: be it so.

KING HENRY VI:
Ah, know you not the city favours them,
And they have troops of soldiers at their beck?

EXETER:
But when the duke is slain, they'll quickly fly.

KING HENRY VI:
Far be the thought of this from Henry's heart,
To make a shambles of the parliament-house!
Cousin of Exeter, frowns, words and threats
Shall be the war that Henry means to use.
Thou factious Duke of York, descend my throne,
and kneel for grace and mercy at my feet;
I am thy sovereign.

YORK:
I am thine.

EXETER:
For shame, come down: he made thee Duke of York.

YORK:
'Twas my inheritance, as the earldom was.

EXETER:
Thy father was a traitor to the crown.

WARWICK:
Exeter, thou art a traitor to the crown
In following this usurping Henry.

CLIFFORD:
Whom should he follow but his natural king?

WARWICK:
True, Clifford; and that's Richard Duke of York.

KING HENRY VI:
And shall I stand, and thou sit in my throne?

YORK:
It must and shall be so: content thyself.

WARWICK:
Be Duke of Lancaster; let him be king.

WESTMORELAND:
He is both king and Duke of Lancaster;
And that the Lord of Westmoreland shall maintain.

WARWICK:
And Warwick shall disprove it. You forget
That we are those which chased you from the field
And slew your fathers, and with colours spread
March'd through the city to the palace gates.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Yes, Warwick, I remember it to my grief;
And, by his soul, thou and thy house shall rue it.

WESTMORELAND:
Plantagenet, of thee and these thy sons,
Thy kinsman and thy friends, I'll have more lives
Than drops of blood were in my father's veins.

CLIFFORD:
Urge it no more; lest that, instead of words,
I send thee, Warwick, such a messenger
As shall revenge his death before I stir.

WARWICK:
Poor Clifford! how I scorn his worthless threats!

YORK:
Will you we show our title to the crown?
If not, our swords shall plead it in the field.

KING HENRY VI:
What title hast thou, traitor, to the crown?
Thy father was, as thou art, Duke of York;
Thy grandfather, Roger Mortimer, Earl of March:
I am the son of Henry the Fifth,
Who made the Dauphin and the French to stoop
And seized upon their towns and provinces.

WARWICK:
Talk not of France, sith thou hast lost it all.

KING HENRY VI:
The lord protector lost it, and not I:
When I was crown'd I was but nine months old.

RICHARD:
You are old enough now, and yet, methinks, you lose.
Father, tear the crown from the usurper's head.

EDWARD:
Sweet father, do so; set it on your head.

MONTAGUE:
Good brother, as thou lovest and honourest arms,
Let's fight it out and not stand cavilling thus.

RICHARD:
Sound drums and trumpets, and the king will fly.

YORK:
Sons, peace!

KING HENRY VI:
Peace, thou! and give King Henry leave to speak.

WARWICK:
Plantagenet shall speak first: hear him, lords;
And be you silent and attentive too,
For he that interrupts him shall not live.

KING HENRY VI:
Think'st thou that I will leave my kingly throne,
Wherein my grandsire and my father sat?
No: first shall war unpeople this my realm;
Ay, and their colours, often borne in France,
And now in England to our heart's great sorrow,
Shall be my winding-sheet. Why faint you, lords?
My title's good, and better far than his.

WARWICK:
Prove it, Henry, and thou shalt be king.

KING HENRY VI:
Henry the Fourth by conquest got the crown.

YORK:
'Twas by rebellion against his king.

KING HENRY VI:

YORK:
What then?

KING HENRY VI:
An if he may, then am I lawful king;
For Richard, in the view of many lords,
Resign'd the crown to Henry the Fourth,
Whose heir my father was, and I am his.

YORK:
He rose against him, being his sovereign,
And made him to resign his crown perforce.

WARWICK:
Suppose, my lords, he did it unconstrain'd,
Think you 'twere prejudicial to his crown?

EXETER:
No; for he could not so resign his crown
But that the next heir should succeed and reign.

KING HENRY VI:
Art thou against us, Duke of Exeter?

EXETER:
His is the right, and therefore pardon me.

YORK:
Why whisper you, my lords, and answer not?

EXETER:
My conscience tells me he is lawful king.

KING HENRY VI:

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Plantagenet, for all the claim thou lay'st,
Think not that Henry shall be so deposed.

WARWICK:
Deposed he shall be, in despite of all.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Thou art deceived: 'tis not thy southern power,
Of Essex, Norfolk, Suffolk, nor of Kent,
Which makes thee thus presumptuous and proud,
Can set the duke up in despite of me.

CLIFFORD:
King Henry, be thy title right or wrong,
Lord Clifford vows to fight in thy defence:
May that ground gape and swallow me alive,
Where I shall kneel to him that slew my father!

KING HENRY VI:
O Clifford, how thy words revive my heart!

YORK:
Henry of Lancaster, resign thy crown.
What mutter you, or what conspire you, lords?

WARWICK:
Do right unto this princely Duke of York,
Or I will fill the house with armed men,
And over the chair of state, where now he sits,
Write up his title with usurping blood.

KING HENRY VI:
My Lord of Warwick, hear me but one word:
Let me for this my life-time reign as king.

YORK:
Confirm the crown to me and to mine heirs,
And thou shalt reign in quiet while thou livest.

KING HENRY VI:
I am content: Richard Plantagenet,
Enjoy the kingdom after my decease.

CLIFFORD:
What wrong is this unto the prince your son!

WARWICK:
What good is this to England and himself!

WESTMORELAND:
Base, fearful and despairing Henry!

CLIFFORD:
How hast thou injured both thyself and us!

WESTMORELAND:
I cannot stay to hear these articles.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Nor I.

CLIFFORD:
Come, cousin, let us tell the queen these news.

WESTMORELAND:
Farewell, faint-hearted and degenerate king,
In whose cold blood no spark of honour bides.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Be thou a prey unto the house of York,
And die in bands for this unmanly deed!

CLIFFORD:
In dreadful war mayst thou be overcome,
Or live in peace abandon'd and despised!

WARWICK:
Turn this way, Henry, and regard them not.

EXETER:
They seek revenge and therefore will not yield.

KING HENRY VI:
Ah, Exeter!

WARWICK:
Why should you sigh, my lord?

KING HENRY VI:
Not for myself, Lord Warwick, but my son,
Whom I unnaturally shall disinherit.
But be it as it may: I here entail
The crown to thee and to thine heirs for ever;
Conditionally, that here thou take an oath
To cease this civil war, and, whilst I live,
To honour me as thy king and sovereign,
And neither by treason nor hostility
To seek to put me down and reign thyself.

YORK:
This oath I willingly take and will perform.

WARWICK:
Long live King Henry! Plantagenet embrace him.

KING HENRY VI:
And long live thou and these thy forward sons!

YORK:
Now York and Lancaster are reconciled.

EXETER:
Accursed be he that seeks to make them foes!

YORK:
Farewell, my gracious lord; I'll to my castle.

WARWICK:
And I'll keep London with my soldiers.

NORFOLK:
And I to Norfolk with my followers.

MONTAGUE:
And I unto the sea from whence I came.

KING HENRY VI:
And I, with grief and sorrow, to the court.

EXETER:
Here comes the queen, whose looks bewray her anger:
I'll steal away.

KING HENRY VI:
Exeter, so will I.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Nay, go not from me; I will follow thee.

KING HENRY VI:
Be patient, gentle queen, and I will stay.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Who can be patient in such extremes?
Ah, wretched man! would I had died a maid
And never seen thee, never borne thee son,
Seeing thou hast proved so unnatural a father
Hath he deserved to lose his birthright thus?
Hadst thou but loved him half so well as I,
Or felt that pain which I did for him once,
Or nourish'd him as I did with my blood,
Thou wouldst have left thy dearest heart-blood there,
Rather than have that savage duke thine heir
And disinherited thine only son.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Father, you cannot disinherit me:
If you be king, why should not I succeed?

KING HENRY VI:
Pardon me, Margaret; pardon me, sweet son:
The Earl of Warwick and the duke enforced me.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Enforced thee! art thou king, and wilt be forced?
I shame to hear thee speak. Ah, timorous wretch!
Thou hast undone thyself, thy son and me;
And given unto the house of York such head
As thou shalt reign but by their sufferance.
To entail him and his heirs unto the crown,
What is it, but to make thy sepulchre
And creep into it far before thy time?
Warwick is chancellor and the lord of Calais;
Stern Falconbridge commands the narrow seas;
The duke is made protector of the realm;
And yet shalt thou be safe? such safety finds
The trembling lamb environed with wolves.
Had I been there, which am a silly woman,
The soldiers should have toss'd me on their pikes
Before I would have granted to that act.
But thou preferr'st thy life before thine honour:
And seeing thou dost, I here divorce myself
Both from thy table, Henry, and thy bed,
Until that act of parliament be repeal'd
Whereby my son is disinherited.
The northern lords that have forsworn thy colours
Will follow mine, if once they see them spread;
And spread they shall be, to thy foul disgrace
And utter ruin of the house of York.
Thus do I leave thee. Come, son, let's away;
Our army is ready; come, we'll after them.

KING HENRY VI:
Stay, gentle Margaret, and hear me speak.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Thou hast spoke too much already: get thee gone.

KING HENRY VI:
Gentle son Edward, thou wilt stay with me?

QUEEN MARGARET:
Ay, to be murder'd by his enemies.

PRINCE EDWARD:
When I return with victory from the field
I'll see your grace: till then I'll follow her.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Come, son, away; we may not linger thus.

KING HENRY VI:
Poor queen! how love to me and to her son
Hath made her break out into terms of rage!
Revenged may she be on that hateful duke,
Whose haughty spirit, winged with desire,
Will cost my crown, and like an empty eagle
Tire on the flesh of me and of my son!
The loss of those three lords torments my heart:
I'll write unto them and entreat them fair.
Come, cousin you shall be the messenger.

EXETER:
And I, I hope, shall reconcile them all.
3 KING HENRY VI

RICHARD:
Brother, though I be youngest, give me leave.

EDWARD:
No, I can better play the orator.

MONTAGUE:
But I have reasons strong and forcible.

YORK:
Why, how now, sons and brother! at a strife?
What is your quarrel? how began it first?

EDWARD:
No quarrel, but a slight contention.

YORK:
About what?

RICHARD:
About that which concerns your grace and us;
The crown of England, father, which is yours.

YORK:
Mine boy? not till King Henry be dead.

RICHARD:
Your right depends not on his life or death.

EDWARD:
Now you are heir, therefore enjoy it now:
By giving the house of Lancaster leave to breathe,
It will outrun you, father, in the end.

YORK:
I took an oath that he should quietly reign.

EDWARD:
But for a kingdom any oath may be broken:
I would break a thousand oaths to reign one year.

RICHARD:
No; God forbid your grace should be forsworn.

YORK:
I shall be, if I claim by open war.

RICHARD:
I'll prove the contrary, if you'll hear me speak.

YORK:
Thou canst not, son; it is impossible.

RICHARD:
An oath is of no moment, being not took
Before a true and lawful magistrate,
That hath authority over him that swears:
Henry had none, but did usurp the place;
Then, seeing 'twas he that made you to depose,
Your oath, my lord, is vain and frivolous.
Therefore, to arms! And, father, do but think
How sweet a thing it is to wear a crown;
Within whose circuit is Elysium
And all that poets feign of bliss and joy.
Why do we finger thus? I cannot rest
Until the white rose that I wear be dyed
Even in the lukewarm blood of Henry's heart.

YORK:
Richard, enough; I will be king, or die.
Brother, thou shalt to London presently,
And whet on Warwick to this enterprise.
Thou, Richard, shalt to the Duke of Norfolk,
And tell him privily of our intent.
You Edward, shall unto my Lord Cobham,
With whom the Kentishmen will willingly rise:
In them I trust; for they are soldiers,
Witty, courteous, liberal, full of spirit.
While you are thus employ'd, what resteth more,
But that I seek occasion how to rise,
And yet the king not privy to my drift,
Nor any of the house of Lancaster?
But, stay: what news? Why comest thou in such post?

Messenger:
The queen with all the northern earls and lords
Intend here to besiege you in your castle:
She is hard by with twenty thousand men;
And therefore fortify your hold, my lord.

YORK:
Ay, with my sword. What! think'st thou that we fear them?
Edward and Richard, you shall stay with me;
My brother Montague shall post to London:
Let noble Warwick, Cobham, and the rest,
Whom we have left protectors of the king,
With powerful policy strengthen themselves,
And trust not simple Henry nor his oaths.

MONTAGUE:
Brother, I go; I'll win them, fear it not:
And thus most humbly I do take my leave.
Sir John and Sir Hugh Mortimer, mine uncles,
You are come to Sandal in a happy hour;
The army of the queen mean to besiege us.

JOHN MORTIMER:
She shall not need; we'll meet her in the field.

YORK:
What, with five thousand men?

RICHARD:
Ay, with five hundred, father, for a need:
A woman's general; what should we fear?

EDWARD:
I hear their drums: let's set our men in order,
And issue forth and bid them battle straight.

YORK:
Five men to twenty! though the odds be great,
I doubt not, uncle, of our victory.
Many a battle have I won in France,
When as the enemy hath been ten to one:
Why should I not now have the like success?
3 KING HENRY VI

RUTLAND:
Ah, whither shall I fly to 'scape their hands?
Ah, tutor, look where bloody Clifford comes!

CLIFFORD:
Chaplain, away! thy priesthood saves thy life.
As for the brat of this accursed duke,
Whose father slew my father, he shall die.

Tutor:
And I, my lord, will bear him company.

CLIFFORD:
Soldiers, away with him!

Tutor:
Ah, Clifford, murder not this innocent child,
Lest thou be hated both of God and man!

CLIFFORD:
How now! is he dead already? or is it fear
That makes him close his eyes? I'll open them.

RUTLAND:
So looks the pent-up lion o'er the wretch
That trembles under his devouring paws;
And so he walks, insulting o'er his prey,
And so he comes, to rend his limbs asunder.
Ah, gentle Clifford, kill me with thy sword,
And not with such a cruel threatening look.
Sweet Clifford, hear me speak before I die.
I am too mean a subject for thy wrath:
Be thou revenged on men, and let me live.

CLIFFORD:
In vain thou speak'st, poor boy; my father's blood
Hath stopp'd the passage where thy words should enter.

RUTLAND:
Then let my father's blood open it again:
He is a man, and, Clifford, cope with him.

CLIFFORD:
Had thy brethren here, their lives and thine
Were not revenge sufficient for me;
No, if I digg'd up thy forefathers' graves
And hung their rotten coffins up in chains,
It could not slake mine ire, nor ease my heart.
The sight of any of the house of York
Is as a fury to torment my soul;
And till I root out their accursed line
And leave not one alive, I live in hell.
Therefore--

RUTLAND:
O, let me pray before I take my death!
To thee I pray; sweet Clifford, pity me!

CLIFFORD:
Such pity as my rapier's point affords.

RUTLAND:
I never did thee harm: why wilt thou slay me?

CLIFFORD:
Thy father hath.

RUTLAND:
But 'twas ere I was born.
Thou hast one son; for his sake pity me,
Lest in revenge thereof, sith God is just,
He be as miserably slain as I.
Ah, let me live in prison all my days;
And when I give occasion of offence,
Then let me die, for now thou hast no cause.

CLIFFORD:
No cause!
Thy father slew my father; therefore, die.

RUTLAND:
Di faciant laudis summa sit ista tuae!

CLIFFORD:
Plantagenet! I come, Plantagenet!
And this thy son's blood cleaving to my blade
Shall rust upon my weapon, till thy blood,
Congeal'd with this, do make me wipe off both.
3 KING HENRY VI

YORK:
The army of the queen hath got the field:
My uncles both are slain in rescuing me;
And all my followers to the eager foe
Turn back and fly, like ships before the wind
Or lambs pursued by hunger-starved wolves.
My sons, God knows what hath bechanced them:
But this I know, they have demean'd themselves
Like men born to renown by life or death.
Three times did Richard make a lane to me.
And thrice cried 'Courage, father! fight it out!'
And full as oft came Edward to my side,
With purple falchion, painted to the hilt
In blood of those that had encounter'd him:
And when the hardiest warriors did retire,
Richard cried 'Charge! and give no foot of ground!'
And cried 'A crown, or else a glorious tomb!
A sceptre, or an earthly sepulchre!'
With this, we charged again: but, out, alas!
We bodged again; as I have seen a swan
With bootless labour swim against the tide
And spend her strength with over-matching waves.
Ah, hark! the fatal followers do pursue;
And I am faint and cannot fly their fury:
And were I strong, I would not shun their fury:
The sands are number'd that make up my life;
Here must I stay, and here my life must end.
Come, bloody Clifford, rough Northumberland,
I dare your quenchless fury to more rage:
I am your butt, and I abide your shot.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Yield to our mercy, proud Plantagenet.

CLIFFORD:
Ay, to such mercy as his ruthless arm,
With downright payment, show'd unto my father.
Now Phaethon hath tumbled from his car,
And made an evening at the noontide prick.

YORK:
My ashes, as the phoenix, may bring forth
A bird that will revenge upon you all:
And in that hope I throw mine eyes to heaven,
Scorning whate'er you can afflict me with.
Why come you not? what! multitudes, and fear?

CLIFFORD:
So cowards fight when they can fly no further;
So doves do peck the falcon's piercing talons;
So desperate thieves, all hopeless of their lives,
Breathe out invectives 'gainst the officers.

YORK:
O Clifford, but bethink thee once again,
And in thy thought o'er-run my former time;
And, if though canst for blushing, view this face,
And bite thy tongue, that slanders him with cowardice
Whose frown hath made thee faint and fly ere this!

CLIFFORD:
I will not bandy with thee word for word,
But buckle with thee blows, twice two for one.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Hold, valiant Clifford! for a thousand causes
I would prolong awhile the traitor's life.
Wrath makes him deaf: speak thou, Northumberland.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Hold, Clifford! do not honour him so much
To prick thy finger, though to wound his heart:
What valour were it, when a cur doth grin,
For one to thrust his hand between his teeth,
When he might spurn him with his foot away?
It is war's prize to take all vantages;
And ten to one is no impeach of valour.

CLIFFORD:
Ay, ay, so strives the woodcock with the gin.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
So doth the cony struggle in the net.

YORK:
So triumph thieves upon their conquer'd booty;
So true men yield, with robbers so o'ermatch'd.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
What would your grace have done unto him now?

QUEEN MARGARET:
Brave warriors, Clifford and Northumberland,
Come, make him stand upon this molehill here,
That raught at mountains with outstretched arms,
Yet parted but the shadow with his hand.
What! was it you that would be England's king?
Was't you that revell'd in our parliament,
And made a preachment of your high descent?
Where are your mess of sons to back you now?
The wanton Edward, and the lusty George?
And where's that valiant crook-back prodigy,
Dicky your boy, that with his grumbling voice
Was wont to cheer his dad in mutinies?
Or, with the rest, where is your darling Rutland?
Look, York: I stain'd this napkin with the blood
That valiant Clifford, with his rapier's point,
Made issue from the bosom of the boy;
And if thine eyes can water for his death,
I give thee this to dry thy cheeks withal.
Alas poor York! but that I hate thee deadly,
I should lament thy miserable state.
I prithee, grieve, to make me merry, York.
What, hath thy fiery heart so parch'd thine entrails
That not a tear can fall for Rutland's death?
Why art thou patient, man? thou shouldst be mad;
And I, to make thee mad, do mock thee thus.
Stamp, rave, and fret, that I may sing and dance.
Thou wouldst be fee'd, I see, to make me sport:
York cannot speak, unless he wear a crown.
A crown for York! and, lords, bow low to him:
Hold you his hands, whilst I do set it on.
Ay, marry, sir, now looks he like a king!
Ay, this is he that took King Henry's chair,
And this is he was his adopted heir.
But how is it that great Plantagenet
Is crown'd so soon, and broke his solemn oath?
As I bethink me, you should not be king
Till our King Henry had shook hands with death.
And will you pale your head in Henry's glory,
And rob his temples of the diadem,
Now in his life, against your holy oath?
O, 'tis a fault too too unpardonable!
Off with the crown, and with the crown his head;
And, whilst we breathe, take time to do him dead.

CLIFFORD:
That is my office, for my father's sake.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Nay, stay; lets hear the orisons he makes.

YORK:
She-wolf of France, but worse than wolves of France,
Whose tongue more poisons than the adder's tooth!
How ill-beseeming is it in thy sex
To triumph, like an Amazonian trull,
Upon their woes whom fortune captivates!
But that thy face is, vizard-like, unchanging,
Made impudent with use of evil deeds,
I would assay, proud queen, to make thee blush.
To tell thee whence thou camest, of whom derived,
Were shame enough to shame thee, wert thou not shameless.
Thy father bears the type of King of Naples,
Of both the Sicils and Jerusalem,
Yet not so wealthy as an English yeoman.
Hath that poor monarch taught thee to insult?
It needs not, nor it boots thee not, proud queen,
Unless the adage must be verified,
That beggars mounted run their horse to death.
'Tis beauty that doth oft make women proud;
But, God he knows, thy share thereof is small:
'Tis virtue that doth make them most admired;
The contrary doth make thee wonder'd at:
'Tis government that makes them seem divine;
The want thereof makes thee abominable:
Thou art as opposite to every good
As the Antipodes are unto us,
Or as the south to the septentrion.
O tiger's heart wrapt in a woman's hide!
How couldst thou drain the life-blood of the child,
To bid the father wipe his eyes withal,
And yet be seen to bear a woman's face?
Women are soft, mild, pitiful and flexible;
Thou stern, obdurate, flinty, rough, remorseless.
Bids't thou me rage? why, now thou hast thy wish:
Wouldst have me weep? why, now thou hast thy will:
For raging wind blows up incessant showers,
And when the rage allays, the rain begins.
These tears are my sweet Rutland's obsequies:
And every drop cries vengeance for his death,
'Gainst thee, fell Clifford, and thee, false
Frenchwoman.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Beshrew me, but his passion moves me so
That hardly can I cheque my eyes from tears.

YORK:
That face of his the hungry cannibals
Would not have touch'd, would not have stain'd with blood:
But you are more inhuman, more inexorable,
O, ten times more, than tigers of Hyrcania.
See, ruthless queen, a hapless father's tears:
This cloth thou dip'dst in blood of my sweet boy,
And I with tears do wash the blood away.
Keep thou the napkin, and go boast of this:
And if thou tell'st the heavy story right,
Upon my soul, the hearers will shed tears;
Yea even my foes will shed fast-falling tears,
And say 'Alas, it was a piteous deed!'
There, take the crown, and, with the crown, my curse;
And in thy need such comfort come to thee
As now I reap at thy too cruel hand!
Hard-hearted Clifford, take me from the world:
My soul to heaven, my blood upon your heads!

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Had he been slaughter-man to all my kin,
I should not for my life but weep with him.
To see how inly sorrow gripes his soul.

QUEEN MARGARET:
What, weeping-ripe, my Lord Northumberland?
Think but upon the wrong he did us all,
And that will quickly dry thy melting tears.

CLIFFORD:
Here's for my oath, here's for my father's death.

QUEEN MARGARET:
And here's to right our gentle-hearted king.

YORK:
Open Thy gate of mercy, gracious God!
My soul flies through these wounds to seek out Thee.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Off with his head, and set it on York gates;
So York may overlook the town of York.
3 KING HENRY VI

EDWARD:
I wonder how our princely father 'scaped,
Or whether he be 'scaped away or no
From Clifford's and Northumberland's pursuit:
Had he been ta'en, we should have heard the news;
Had he been slain, we should have heard the news;
Or had he 'scaped, methinks we should have heard
The happy tidings of his good escape.
How fares my brother? why is he so sad?

RICHARD:
I cannot joy, until I be resolved
Where our right valiant father is become.
I saw him in the battle range about;
And watch'd him how he singled Clifford forth.
Methought he bore him in the thickest troop
As doth a lion in a herd of neat;
Or as a bear, encompass'd round with dogs,
Who having pinch'd a few and made them cry,
The rest stand all aloof, and bark at him.
So fared our father with his enemies;
So fled his enemies my warlike father:
Methinks, 'tis prize enough to be his son.
See how the morning opes her golden gates,
And takes her farewell of the glorious sun!
How well resembles it the prime of youth,
Trimm'd like a younker prancing to his love!

EDWARD:
Dazzle mine eyes, or do I see three suns?

RICHARD:
Three glorious suns, each one a perfect sun;
Not separated with the racking clouds,
But sever'd in a pale clear-shining sky.
See, see! they join, embrace, and seem to kiss,
As if they vow'd some league inviolable:
Now are they but one lamp, one light, one sun.
In this the heaven figures some event.

EDWARD:
'Tis wondrous strange, the like yet never heard of.
I think it cites us, brother, to the field,
That we, the sons of brave Plantagenet,
Each one already blazing by our meeds,
Should notwithstanding join our lights together
And over-shine the earth as this the world.
Whate'er it bodes, henceforward will I bear
Upon my target three fair-shining suns.

RICHARD:
Nay, bear three daughters: by your leave I speak it,
You love the breeder better than the male.
But what art thou, whose heavy looks foretell
Some dreadful story hanging on thy tongue?

Messenger:
Ah, one that was a woful looker-on
When as the noble Duke of York was slain,
Your princely father and my loving lord!

EDWARD:
O, speak no more, for I have heard too much.

RICHARD:
Say how he died, for I will hear it all.

Messenger:
Environed he was with many foes,
And stood against them, as the hope of Troy
Against the Greeks that would have enter'd Troy.
But Hercules himself must yield to odds;
And many strokes, though with a little axe,
Hew down and fell the hardest-timber'd oak.
By many hands your father was subdued;
But only slaughter'd by the ireful arm
Of unrelenting Clifford and the queen,
Who crown'd the gracious duke in high despite,
Laugh'd in his face; and when with grief he wept,
The ruthless queen gave him to dry his cheeks
A napkin steeped in the harmless blood
Of sweet young Rutland, by rough Clifford slain:
And after many scorns, many foul taunts,
They took his head, and on the gates of York
They set the same; and there it doth remain,
The saddest spectacle that e'er I view'd.

EDWARD:
Sweet Duke of York, our prop to lean upon,
Now thou art gone, we have no staff, no stay.
O Clifford, boisterous Clifford! thou hast slain
The flower of Europe for his chivalry;
And treacherously hast thou vanquish'd him,
For hand to hand he would have vanquish'd thee.
Now my soul's palace is become a prison:
Ah, would she break from hence, that this my body
Might in the ground be closed up in rest!
For never henceforth shall I joy again,
Never, O never shall I see more joy!

RICHARD:
I cannot weep; for all my body's moisture
Scarce serves to quench my furnace-burning heart:
Nor can my tongue unload my heart's great burthen;
For selfsame wind that I should speak withal
Is kindling coals that fires all my breast,
And burns me up with flames that tears would quench.
To weep is to make less the depth of grief:
Tears then for babes; blows and revenge for me
Richard, I bear thy name; I'll venge thy death,
Or die renowned by attempting it.

EDWARD:
His name that valiant duke hath left with thee;
His dukedom and his chair with me is left.

RICHARD:
Nay, if thou be that princely eagle's bird,
Show thy descent by gazing 'gainst the sun:
For chair and dukedom, throne and kingdom say;
Either that is thine, or else thou wert not his.

WARWICK:
How now, fair lords! What fare? what news abroad?

RICHARD:
Great Lord of Warwick, if we should recount
Our baleful news, and at each word's deliverance
Stab poniards in our flesh till all were told,
The words would add more anguish than the wounds.
O valiant lord, the Duke of York is slain!

EDWARD:
O Warwick, Warwick! that Plantagenet,
Which held three dearly as his soul's redemption,
Is by the stern Lord Clifford done to death.

WARWICK:
Ten days ago I drown'd these news in tears;
And now, to add more measure to your woes,
I come to tell you things sith then befall'n.
After the bloody fray at Wakefield fought,
Where your brave father breathed his latest gasp,
Tidings, as swiftly as the posts could run,
Were brought me of your loss and his depart.
I, then in London keeper of the king,
Muster'd my soldiers, gather'd flocks of friends,
And very well appointed, as I thought,
March'd toward Saint Alban's to intercept the queen,
Bearing the king in my behalf along;
For by my scouts I was advertised
That she was coming with a full intent
To dash our late decree in parliament
Touching King Henry's oath and your succession.
Short tale to make, we at Saint Alban's met
Our battles join'd, and both sides fiercely fought:
But whether 'twas the coldness of the king,
Who look'd full gently on his warlike queen,
That robb'd my soldiers of their heated spleen;
Or whether 'twas report of her success;
Or more than common fear of Clifford's rigour,
Who thunders to his captives blood and death,
I cannot judge: but to conclude with truth,
Their weapons like to lightning came and went;
Our soldiers', like the night-owl's lazy flight,
Or like an idle thresher with a flail,
Fell gently down, as if they struck their friends.
I cheer'd them up with justice of our cause,
With promise of high pay and great rewards:
But all in vain; they had no heart to fight,
And we in them no hope to win the day;
So that we fled; the king unto the queen;
Lord George your brother, Norfolk and myself,
In haste, post-haste, are come to join with you:
For in the marches here we heard you were,
Making another head to fight again.

EDWARD:
Where is the Duke of Norfolk, gentle Warwick?
And when came George from Burgundy to England?

WARWICK:
Some six miles off the duke is with the soldiers;
And for your brother, he was lately sent
From your kind aunt, Duchess of Burgundy,
With aid of soldiers to this needful war.

RICHARD:
'Twas odds, belike, when valiant Warwick fled:
Oft have I heard his praises in pursuit,
But ne'er till now his scandal of retire.

WARWICK:
Nor now my scandal, Richard, dost thou hear;
For thou shalt know this strong right hand of mine
Can pluck the diadem from faint Henry's head,
And wring the awful sceptre from his fist,
Were he as famous and as bold in war
As he is famed for mildness, peace, and prayer.

RICHARD:
I know it well, Lord Warwick; blame me not:
'Tis love I bear thy glories makes me speak.
But in this troublous time what's to be done?
Shall we go throw away our coats of steel,
And wrap our bodies in black mourning gowns,
Numbering our Ave-Maries with our beads?
Or shall we on the helmets of our foes
Tell our devotion with revengeful arms?
If for the last, say ay, and to it, lords.

WARWICK:
Why, therefore Warwick came to seek you out;
And therefore comes my brother Montague.
Attend me, lords. The proud insulting queen,
With Clifford and the haught Northumberland,
And of their feather many more proud birds,
Have wrought the easy-melting king like wax.
He swore consent to your succession,
His oath enrolled in the parliament;
And now to London all the crew are gone,
To frustrate both his oath and what beside
May make against the house of Lancaster.
Their power, I think, is thirty thousand strong:
Now, if the help of Norfolk and myself,
With all the friends that thou, brave Earl of March,
Amongst the loving Welshmen canst procure,
Will but amount to five and twenty thousand,
Why, Via! to London will we march amain,
And once again bestride our foaming steeds,
And once again cry 'Charge upon our foes!'
But never once again turn back and fly.

RICHARD:
Ay, now methinks I hear great Warwick speak:
Ne'er may he live to see a sunshine day,
That cries 'Retire,' if Warwick bid him stay.

EDWARD:
Lord Warwick, on thy shoulder will I lean;
And when thou fail'st--as God forbid the hour!--
Must Edward fall, which peril heaven forfend!

WARWICK:
No longer Earl of March, but Duke of York:
The next degree is England's royal throne;
For King of England shalt thou be proclaim'd
In every borough as we pass along;
And he that throws not up his cap for joy
Shall for the fault make forfeit of his head.
King Edward, valiant Richard, Montague,
Stay we no longer, dreaming of renown,
But sound the trumpets, and about our task.

RICHARD:
Then, Clifford, were thy heart as hard as steel,
As thou hast shown it flinty by thy deeds,
I come to pierce it, or to give thee mine.

EDWARD:
Then strike up drums: God and Saint George for us!

WARWICK:
How now! what news?

Messenger:
The Duke of Norfolk sends you word by me,
The queen is coming with a puissant host;
And craves your company for speedy counsel.

WARWICK:
Why then it sorts, brave warriors, let's away.
3 KING HENRY VI

QUEEN MARGARET:
Welcome, my lord, to this brave town of York.
Yonder's the head of that arch-enemy
That sought to be encompass'd with your crown:
Doth not the object cheer your heart, my lord?

KING HENRY VI:
Ay, as the rocks cheer them that fear their wreck:
To see this sight, it irks my very soul.
Withhold revenge, dear God! 'tis not my fault,
Nor wittingly have I infringed my vow.

CLIFFORD:
My gracious liege, this too much lenity
And harmful pity must be laid aside.
To whom do lions cast their gentle looks?
Not to the beast that would usurp their den.
Whose hand is that the forest bear doth lick?
Not his that spoils her young before her face.
Who 'scapes the lurking serpent's mortal sting?
Not he that sets his foot upon her back.
The smallest worm will turn being trodden on,
And doves will peck in safeguard of their brood.
Ambitious York doth level at thy crown,
Thou smiling while he knit his angry brows:
He, but a duke, would have his son a king,
And raise his issue, like a loving sire;
Thou, being a king, blest with a goodly son,
Didst yield consent to disinherit him,
Which argued thee a most unloving father.
Unreasonable creatures feed their young;
And though man's face be fearful to their eyes,
Yet, in protection of their tender ones,
Who hath not seen them, even with those wings
Which sometime they have used with fearful flight,
Make war with him that climb'd unto their nest,
Offer their own lives in their young's defence?
For shame, my liege, make them your precedent!
Were it not pity that this goodly boy
Should lose his birthright by his father's fault,
And long hereafter say unto his child,
'What my great-grandfather and his grandsire got
My careless father fondly gave away'?
Ah, what a shame were this! Look on the boy;
And let his manly face, which promiseth
Successful fortune, steel thy melting heart
To hold thine own and leave thine own with him.

KING HENRY VI:
Full well hath Clifford play'd the orator,
Inferring arguments of mighty force.
But, Clifford, tell me, didst thou never hear
That things ill-got had ever bad success?
And happy always was it for that son
Whose father for his hoarding went to hell?
I'll leave my son my virtuous deeds behind;
And would my father had left me no more!
For all the rest is held at such a rate
As brings a thousand-fold more care to keep
Than in possession and jot of pleasure.
Ah, cousin York! would thy best friends did know
How it doth grieve me that thy head is here!

QUEEN MARGARET:
My lord, cheer up your spirits: our foes are nigh,
And this soft courage makes your followers faint.
You promised knighthood to our forward son:
Unsheathe your sword, and dub him presently.
Edward, kneel down.

KING HENRY VI:
Edward Plantagenet, arise a knight;
And learn this lesson, draw thy sword in right.

PRINCE:
My gracious father, by your kingly leave,
I'll draw it as apparent to the crown,
And in that quarrel use it to the death.

CLIFFORD:
Why, that is spoken like a toward prince.

Messenger:
Royal commanders, be in readiness:
For with a band of thirty thousand men
Comes Warwick, backing of the Duke of York;
And in the towns, as they do march along,
Proclaims him king, and many fly to him:
Darraign your battle, for they are at hand.

CLIFFORD:
I would your highness would depart the field:
The queen hath best success when you are absent.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Ay, good my lord, and leave us to our fortune.

KING HENRY VI:
Why, that's my fortune too; therefore I'll stay.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Be it with resolution then to fight.

PRINCE EDWARD:
My royal father, cheer these noble lords
And hearten those that fight in your defence:
Unsheathe your sword, good father; cry 'Saint George!'

EDWARD:
Now, perjured Henry! wilt thou kneel for grace,
And set thy diadem upon my head;
Or bide the mortal fortune of the field?

QUEEN MARGARET:
Go, rate thy minions, proud insulting boy!
Becomes it thee to be thus bold in terms
Before thy sovereign and thy lawful king?

EDWARD:
I am his king, and he should bow his knee;
I was adopted heir by his consent:
Since when, his oath is broke; for, as I hear,
You, that are king, though he do wear the crown,
Have caused him, by new act of parliament,
To blot out me, and put his own son in.

CLIFFORD:
And reason too:
Who should succeed the father but the son?

RICHARD:
Are you there, butcher? O, I cannot speak!

CLIFFORD:
Ay, crook-back, here I stand to answer thee,
Or any he the proudest of thy sort.

RICHARD:
'Twas you that kill'd young Rutland, was it not?

CLIFFORD:
Ay, and old York, and yet not satisfied.

RICHARD:
For God's sake, lords, give signal to the fight.

WARWICK:
What say'st thou, Henry, wilt thou yield the crown?

QUEEN MARGARET:
Why, how now, long-tongued Warwick! dare you speak?
When you and I met at Saint Alban's last,
Your legs did better service than your hands.

WARWICK:
Then 'twas my turn to fly, and now 'tis thine.

CLIFFORD:
You said so much before, and yet you fled.

WARWICK:
'Twas not your valour, Clifford, drove me thence.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
No, nor your manhood that durst make you stay.

RICHARD:
Northumberland, I hold thee reverently.
Break off the parley; for scarce I can refrain
The execution of my big-swoln heart
Upon that Clifford, that cruel child-killer.

CLIFFORD:
I slew thy father, call'st thou him a child?

RICHARD:
Ay, like a dastard and a treacherous coward,
As thou didst kill our tender brother Rutland;
But ere sunset I'll make thee curse the deed.

KING HENRY VI:
Have done with words, my lords, and hear me speak.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Defy them then, or else hold close thy lips.

KING HENRY VI:
I prithee, give no limits to my tongue:
I am a king, and privileged to speak.

CLIFFORD:
My liege, the wound that bred this meeting here
Cannot be cured by words; therefore be still.

RICHARD:
Then, executioner, unsheathe thy sword:
By him that made us all, I am resolved
that Clifford's manhood lies upon his tongue.

EDWARD:
Say, Henry, shall I have my right, or no?
A thousand men have broke their fasts to-day,
That ne'er shall dine unless thou yield the crown.

WARWICK:
If thou deny, their blood upon thy head;
For York in justice puts his armour on.

PRINCE EDWARD:
If that be right which Warwick says is right,
There is no wrong, but every thing is right.

RICHARD:
Whoever got thee, there thy mother stands;
For, well I wot, thou hast thy mother's tongue.

QUEEN MARGARET:
But thou art neither like thy sire nor dam;
But like a foul mis-shapen stigmatic,
Mark'd by the destinies to be avoided,
As venom toads, or lizards' dreadful stings.

RICHARD:
Iron of Naples hid with English gilt,
Whose father bears the title of a king,--
As if a channel should be call'd the sea,--
Shamest thou not, knowing whence thou art extraught,
To let thy tongue detect thy base-born heart?

EDWARD:
A wisp of straw were worth a thousand crowns,
To make this shameless callet know herself.
Helen of Greece was fairer far than thou,
Although thy husband may be Menelaus;
And ne'er was Agamemnon's brother wrong'd
By that false woman, as this king by thee.
His father revell'd in the heart of France,
And tamed the king, and made the dauphin stoop;
And had he match'd according to his state,
He might have kept that glory to this day;
But when he took a beggar to his bed,
And graced thy poor sire with his bridal-day,
Even then that sunshine brew'd a shower for him,
That wash'd his father's fortunes forth of France,
And heap'd sedition on his crown at home.
For what hath broach'd this tumult but thy pride?
Hadst thou been meek, our title still had slept;
And we, in pity of the gentle king,
Had slipp'd our claim until another age.

GEORGE:
But when we saw our sunshine made thy spring,
And that thy summer bred us no increase,
We set the axe to thy usurping root;
And though the edge hath something hit ourselves,
Yet, know thou, since we have begun to strike,
We'll never leave till we have hewn thee down,
Or bathed thy growing with our heated bloods.

EDWARD:
And, in this resolution, I defy thee;
Not willing any longer conference,
Since thou deniest the gentle king to speak.
Sound trumpets! let our bloody colours wave!
And either victory, or else a grave.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Stay, Edward.

EDWARD:
No, wrangling woman, we'll no longer stay:
These words will cost ten thousand lives this day.
3 KING HENRY VI

WARWICK:
Forspent with toil, as runners with a race,
I lay me down a little while to breathe;
For strokes received, and many blows repaid,
Have robb'd my strong-knit sinews of their strength,
And spite of spite needs must I rest awhile.

EDWARD:
Smile, gentle heaven! or strike, ungentle death!
For this world frowns, and Edward's sun is clouded.

WARWICK:
How now, my lord! what hap? what hope of good?

GEORGE:
Our hap is loss, our hope but sad despair;
Our ranks are broke, and ruin follows us:
What counsel give you? whither shall we fly?

EDWARD:
Bootless is flight, they follow us with wings;
And weak we are and cannot shun pursuit.

RICHARD:
Ah, Warwick, why hast thou withdrawn thyself?
Thy brother's blood the thirsty earth hath drunk,
Broach'd with the steely point of Clifford's lance;
And in the very pangs of death he cried,
Like to a dismal clangour heard from far,
'Warwick, revenge! brother, revenge my death!'
So, underneath the belly of their steeds,
That stain'd their fetlocks in his smoking blood,
The noble gentleman gave up the ghost.

WARWICK:
Then let the earth be drunken with our blood:
I'll kill my horse, because I will not fly.
Why stand we like soft-hearted women here,
Wailing our losses, whiles the foe doth rage;
And look upon, as if the tragedy
Were play'd in jest by counterfeiting actors?
Here on my knee I vow to God above,
I'll never pause again, never stand still,
Till either death hath closed these eyes of mine
Or fortune given me measure of revenge.

EDWARD:
O Warwick, I do bend my knee with thine;
And in this vow do chain my soul to thine!
And, ere my knee rise from the earth's cold face,
I throw my hands, mine eyes, my heart to thee,
Thou setter up and plucker down of kings,
Beseeching thee, if with they will it stands
That to my foes this body must be prey,
Yet that thy brazen gates of heaven may ope,
And give sweet passage to my sinful soul!
Now, lords, take leave until we meet again,
Where'er it be, in heaven or in earth.

RICHARD:
Brother, give me thy hand; and, gentle Warwick,
Let me embrace thee in my weary arms:
I, that did never weep, now melt with woe
That winter should cut off our spring-time so.

WARWICK:
Away, away! Once more, sweet lords farewell.

GEORGE:
Yet let us all together to our troops,
And give them leave to fly that will not stay;
And call them pillars that will stand to us;
And, if we thrive, promise them such rewards
As victors wear at the Olympian games:
This may plant courage in their quailing breasts;
For yet is hope of life and victory.
Forslow no longer, make we hence amain.
3 KING HENRY VI

RICHARD:
Now, Clifford, I have singled thee alone:
Suppose this arm is for the Duke of York,
And this for Rutland; both bound to revenge,
Wert thou environ'd with a brazen wall.

CLIFFORD:
Now, Richard, I am with thee here alone:
This is the hand that stabb'd thy father York;
And this the hand that slew thy brother Rutland;
And here's the heart that triumphs in their death
And cheers these hands that slew thy sire and brother
To execute the like upon thyself;
And so, have at thee!

RICHARD:
Nay Warwick, single out some other chase;
For I myself will hunt this wolf to death.
3 KING HENRY VI

KING HENRY VI:
This battle fares like to the morning's war,
When dying clouds contend with growing light,
What time the shepherd, blowing of his nails,
Can neither call it perfect day nor night.
Now sways it this way, like a mighty sea
Forced by the tide to combat with the wind;
Now sways it that way, like the selfsame sea
Forced to retire by fury of the wind:
Sometime the flood prevails, and then the wind;
Now one the better, then another best;
Both tugging to be victors, breast to breast,
Yet neither conqueror nor conquered:
So is the equal of this fell war.
Here on this molehill will I sit me down.
To whom God will, there be the victory!
For Margaret my queen, and Clifford too,
Have chid me from the battle; swearing both
They prosper best of all when I am thence.
Would I were dead! if God's good will were so;
For what is in this world but grief and woe?
O God! methinks it were a happy life,
To be no better than a homely swain;
To sit upon a hill, as I do now,
To carve out dials quaintly, point by point,
Thereby to see the minutes how they run,
How many make the hour full complete;
How many hours bring about the day;
How many days will finish up the year;
How many years a mortal man may live.
When this is known, then to divide the times:
So many hours must I tend my flock;
So many hours must I take my rest;
So many hours must I contemplate;
So many hours must I sport myself;
So many days my ewes have been with young;
So many weeks ere the poor fools will ean:
So many years ere I shall shear the fleece:
So minutes, hours, days, months, and years,
Pass'd over to the end they were created,
Would bring white hairs unto a quiet grave.
Ah, what a life were this! how sweet! how lovely!
Gives not the hawthorn-bush a sweeter shade
To shepherds looking on their silly sheep,
Than doth a rich embroider'd canopy
To kings that fear their subjects' treachery?
O, yes, it doth; a thousand-fold it doth.
And to conclude, the shepherd's homely curds,
His cold thin drink out of his leather bottle.
His wonted sleep under a fresh tree's shade,
All which secure and sweetly he enjoys,
Is far beyond a prince's delicates,
His viands sparkling in a golden cup,
His body couched in a curious bed,


--- End of file: shakespear_11.txt ---

When care, mistrust, and treason waits on him.

Son:
Ill blows the wind that profits nobody.
This man, whom hand to hand I slew in fight,
May be possessed with some store of crowns;
And I, that haply take them from him now,
May yet ere night yield both my life and them
To some man else, as this dead man doth me.
Who's this? O God! it is my father's face,
Whom in this conflict I unwares have kill'd.
O heavy times, begetting such events!
From London by the king was I press'd forth;
My father, being the Earl of Warwick's man,
Came on the part of York, press'd by his master;
And I, who at his hands received my life, him
Have by my hands of life bereaved him.
Pardon me, God, I knew not what I did!
And pardon, father, for I knew not thee!
My tears shall wipe away these bloody marks;
And no more words till they have flow'd their fill.

KING HENRY VI:
O piteous spectacle! O bloody times!
Whiles lions war and battle for their dens,
Poor harmless lambs abide their enmity.
Weep, wretched man, I'll aid thee tear for tear;
And let our hearts and eyes, like civil war,
Be blind with tears, and break o'ercharged with grief.

Father:
Thou that so stoutly hast resisted me,
Give me thy gold, if thou hast any gold:
For I have bought it with an hundred blows.
But let me see: is this our foeman's face?
Ah, no, no, no, it is mine only son!
Ah, boy, if any life be left in thee,
Throw up thine eye! see, see what showers arise,
Blown with the windy tempest of my heart,
Upon thy words, that kill mine eye and heart!
O, pity, God, this miserable age!
What stratagems, how fell, how butcherly,
Erroneous, mutinous and unnatural,
This deadly quarrel daily doth beget!
O boy, thy father gave thee life too soon,
And hath bereft thee of thy life too late!

KING HENRY VI:
Woe above woe! grief more than common grief!
O that my death would stay these ruthful deeds!
O pity, pity, gentle heaven, pity!
The red rose and the white are on his face,
The fatal colours of our striving houses:
The one his purple blood right well resembles;
The other his pale cheeks, methinks, presenteth:
Wither one rose, and let the other flourish;
If you contend, a thousand lives must wither.

Son:
How will my mother for a father's death
Take on with me and ne'er be satisfied!

Father:
How will my wife for slaughter of my son
Shed seas of tears and ne'er be satisfied!

KING HENRY VI:
How will the country for these woful chances
Misthink the king and not be satisfied!

Son:
Was ever son so rued a father's death?

Father:
Was ever father so bemoan'd his son?

KING HENRY VI:
Was ever king so grieved for subjects' woe?
Much is your sorrow; mine ten times so much.

Son:
I'll bear thee hence, where I may weep my fill.

Father:
These arms of mine shall be thy winding-sheet;
My heart, sweet boy, shall be thy sepulchre,
For from my heart thine image ne'er shall go;
My sighing breast shall be thy funeral bell;
And so obsequious will thy father be,
Even for the loss of thee, having no more,
As Priam was for all his valiant sons.
I'll bear thee hence; and let them fight that will,
For I have murdered where I should not kill.

KING HENRY VI:
Sad-hearted men, much overgone with care,
Here sits a king more woful than you are.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Fly, father, fly! for all your friends are fled,
And Warwick rages like a chafed bull:
Away! for death doth hold us in pursuit.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Mount you, my lord; towards Berwick post amain:
Edward and Richard, like a brace of greyhounds
Having the fearful flying hare in sight,
With fiery eyes sparkling for very wrath,
And bloody steel grasp'd in their ireful hands,
Are at our backs; and therefore hence amain.

EXETER:
Away! for vengeance comes along with them:
Nay, stay not to expostulate, make speed;
Or else come after: I'll away before.

KING HENRY VI:
Nay, take me with thee, good sweet Exeter:
Not that I fear to stay, but love to go
Whither the queen intends. Forward; away!
3 KING HENRY VI

CLIFFORD:
Here burns my candle out; ay, here it dies,
Which, whiles it lasted, gave King Henry light.
O Lancaster, I fear thy overthrow
More than my body's parting with my soul!
My love and fear glued many friends to thee;
And, now I fall, thy tough commixture melts.
Impairing Henry, strengthening misproud York,
The common people swarm like summer flies;
And whither fly the gnats but to the sun?
And who shines now but Henry's enemies?
O Phoebus, hadst thou never given consent
That Phaethon should cheque thy fiery steeds,
Thy burning car never had scorch'd the earth!
And, Henry, hadst thou sway'd as kings should do,
Or as thy father and his father did,
Giving no ground unto the house of York,
They never then had sprung like summer flies;
I and ten thousand in this luckless realm
Had left no mourning widows for our death;
And thou this day hadst kept thy chair in peace.
For what doth cherish weeds but gentle air?
And what makes robbers bold but too much lenity?
Bootless are plaints, and cureless are my wounds;
No way to fly, nor strength to hold out flight:
The foe is merciless, and will not pity;
For at their hands I have deserved no pity.
The air hath got into my deadly wounds,
And much effuse of blood doth make me faint.
Come, York and Richard, Warwick and the rest;
I stabb'd your fathers' bosoms, split my breast.

EDWARD:
Now breathe we, lords: good fortune bids us pause,
And smooth the frowns of war with peaceful looks.
Some troops pursue the bloody-minded queen,
That led calm Henry, though he were a king,
As doth a sail, fill'd with a fretting gust,
Command an argosy to stem the waves.
But think you, lords, that Clifford fled with them?

WARWICK:
No, 'tis impossible he should escape,
For, though before his face I speak the words
Your brother Richard mark'd him for the grave:
And wheresoe'er he is, he's surely dead.

EDWARD:
Whose soul is that which takes her heavy leave?

RICHARD:
A deadly groan, like life and death's departing.

EDWARD:
See who it is: and, now the battle's ended,
If friend or foe, let him be gently used.

RICHARD:
Revoke that doom of mercy, for 'tis Clifford;
Who not contented that he lopp'd the branch
In hewing Rutland when his leaves put forth,
But set his murdering knife unto the root
From whence that tender spray did sweetly spring,
I mean our princely father, Duke of York.

WARWICK:
From off the gates of York fetch down the head,
Your father's head, which Clifford placed there;
Instead whereof let this supply the room:
Measure for measure must be answered.

EDWARD:
Bring forth that fatal screech-owl to our house,
That nothing sung but death to us and ours:
Now death shall stop his dismal threatening sound,
And his ill-boding tongue no more shall speak.

WARWICK:
I think his understanding is bereft.
Speak, Clifford, dost thou know who speaks to thee?
Dark cloudy death o'ershades his beams of life,
And he nor sees nor hears us what we say.

RICHARD:
O, would he did! and so perhaps he doth:
'Tis but his policy to counterfeit,
Because he would avoid such bitter taunts
Which in the time of death he gave our father.

GEORGE:
If so thou think'st, vex him with eager words.

RICHARD:
Clifford, ask mercy and obtain no grace.

EDWARD:
Clifford, repent in bootless penitence.

WARWICK:
Clifford, devise excuses for thy faults.

GEORGE:
While we devise fell tortures for thy faults.

RICHARD:
Thou didst love York, and I am son to York.

EDWARD:
Thou pitied'st Rutland; I will pity thee.

GEORGE:
Where's Captain Margaret, to fence you now?

WARWICK:
They mock thee, Clifford: swear as thou wast wont.

RICHARD:
What, not an oath? nay, then the world goes hard
When Clifford cannot spare his friends an oath.
I know by that he's dead; and, by my soul,
If this right hand would buy two hour's life,
That I in all despite might rail at him,
This hand should chop it off, and with the
issuing blood
Stifle the villain whose unstanched thirst
York and young Rutland could not satisfy.

WARWICK:
Ay, but he's dead: off with the traitor's head,
And rear it in the place your father's stands.
And now to London with triumphant march,
There to be crowned England's royal king:
From whence shall Warwick cut the sea to France,
And ask the Lady Bona for thy queen:
So shalt thou sinew both these lands together;
And, having France thy friend, thou shalt not dread
The scatter'd foe that hopes to rise again;
For though they cannot greatly sting to hurt,
Yet look to have them buzz to offend thine ears.
First will I see the coronation;
And then to Brittany I'll cross the sea,
To effect this marriage, so it please my lord.

EDWARD:
Even as thou wilt, sweet Warwick, let it be;
For in thy shoulder do I build my seat,
And never will I undertake the thing
Wherein thy counsel and consent is wanting.
Richard, I will create thee Duke of Gloucester,
And George, of Clarence: Warwick, as ourself,
Shall do and undo as him pleaseth best.

RICHARD:
Let me be Duke of Clarence, George of Gloucester;
For Gloucester's dukedom is too ominous.

WARWICK:
Tut, that's a foolish observation:
Richard, be Duke of Gloucester. Now to London,
To see these honours in possession.
3 KING HENRY VI

First Keeper:
Under this thick-grown brake we'll shroud ourselves;
For through this laund anon the deer will come;
And in this covert will we make our stand,
Culling the principal of all the deer.

Second Keeper:
I'll stay above the hill, so both may shoot.

First Keeper:
That cannot be; the noise of thy cross-bow
Will scare the herd, and so my shoot is lost.
Here stand we both, and aim we at the best:
And, for the time shall not seem tedious,
I'll tell thee what befell me on a day
In this self-place where now we mean to stand.

Second Keeper:
Here comes a man; let's stay till he be past.

KING HENRY VI:
From Scotland am I stol'n, even of pure love,
To greet mine own land with my wishful sight.
No, Harry, Harry, 'tis no land of thine;
Thy place is fill'd, thy sceptre wrung from thee,
Thy balm wash'd off wherewith thou wast anointed:
No bending knee will call thee Caesar now,
No humble suitors press to speak for right,
No, not a man comes for redress of thee;
For how can I help them, and not myself?

First Keeper:
Ay, here's a deer whose skin's a keeper's fee:
This is the quondam king; let's seize upon him.

KING HENRY VI:
Let me embrace thee, sour adversity,
For wise men say it is the wisest course.

Second Keeper:
Why linger we? let us lay hands upon him.

First Keeper:
Forbear awhile; we'll hear a little more.

KING HENRY VI:
My queen and son are gone to France for aid;
And, as I hear, the great commanding Warwick
Is thither gone, to crave the French king's sister
To wife for Edward: if this news be true,
Poor queen and son, your labour is but lost;
For Warwick is a subtle orator,
And Lewis a prince soon won with moving words.
By this account then Margaret may win him;
For she's a woman to be pitied much:
Her sighs will make a battery in his breast;
Her tears will pierce into a marble heart;
The tiger will be mild whiles she doth mourn;
And Nero will be tainted with remorse,
To hear and see her plaints, her brinish tears.
Ay, but she's come to beg, Warwick to give;
She, on his left side, craving aid for Henry,
He, on his right, asking a wife for Edward.
She weeps, and says her Henry is deposed;
He smiles, and says his Edward is install'd;
That she, poor wretch, for grief can speak no more;
Whiles Warwick tells his title, smooths the wrong,
Inferreth arguments of mighty strength,
And in conclusion wins the king from her,
With promise of his sister, and what else,
To strengthen and support King Edward's place.
O Margaret, thus 'twill be; and thou, poor soul,
Art then forsaken, as thou went'st forlorn!

Second Keeper:
Say, what art thou that talk'st of kings and queens?

KING HENRY VI:
More than I seem, and less than I was born to:
A man at least, for less I should not be;
And men may talk of kings, and why not I?

Second Keeper:
Ay, but thou talk'st as if thou wert a king.

KING HENRY VI:
Why, so I am, in mind; and that's enough.

Second Keeper:
But, if thou be a king, where is thy crown?

KING HENRY VI:
My crown is in my heart, not on my head;
Not decked with diamonds and Indian stones,
Nor to be seen: my crown is called content:
A crown it is that seldom kings enjoy.

Second Keeper:
Well, if you be a king crown'd with content,
Your crown content and you must be contented
To go along with us; for as we think,
You are the king King Edward hath deposed;
And we his subjects sworn in all allegiance
Will apprehend you as his enemy.

KING HENRY VI:
But did you never swear, and break an oath?

Second Keeper:
No, never such an oath; nor will not now.

KING HENRY VI:
Where did you dwell when I was King of England?

Second Keeper:
Here in this country, where we now remain.

KING HENRY VI:
I was anointed king at nine months old;
My father and my grandfather were kings,
And you were sworn true subjects unto me:
And tell me, then, have you not broke your oaths?

First Keeper:
No;
For we were subjects but while you were king.

KING HENRY VI:
Why, am I dead? do I not breathe a man?
Ah, simple men, you know not what you swear!
Look, as I blow this feather from my face,
And as the air blows it to me again,
Obeying with my wind when I do blow,
And yielding to another when it blows,
Commanded always by the greater gust;
Such is the lightness of you common men.
But do not break your oaths; for of that sin
My mild entreaty shall not make you guilty.
Go where you will, the king shall be commanded;
And be you kings, command, and I'll obey.

First Keeper:
We are true subjects to the king, King Edward.

KING HENRY VI:
So would you be again to Henry,
If he were seated as King Edward is.

First Keeper:
We charge you, in God's name, and the king's,
To go with us unto the officers.

KING HENRY VI:
In God's name, lead; your king's name be obey'd:
And what God will, that let your king perform;
And what he will, I humbly yield unto.
3 KING HENRY VI

KING EDWARD IV:
Brother of Gloucester, at Saint Alban's field
This lady's husband, Sir Richard Grey, was slain,
His lands then seized on by the conqueror:
Her suit is now to repossess those lands;
Which we in justice cannot well deny,
Because in quarrel of the house of York
The worthy gentleman did lose his life.

GLOUCESTER:
Your highness shall do well to grant her suit;
It were dishonour to deny it her.

KING EDWARD IV:
It were no less; but yet I'll make a pause.

GLOUCESTER:

CLARENCE:

GLOUCESTER:

KING EDWARD IV:
Widow, we will consider of your suit;
And come some other time to know our mind.

LADY GREY:
Right gracious lord, I cannot brook delay:
May it please your highness to resolve me now;
And what your pleasure is, shall satisfy me.

GLOUCESTER:

CLARENCE:

GLOUCESTER:

KING EDWARD IV:
How many children hast thou, widow? tell me.

CLARENCE:

GLOUCESTER:

LADY GREY:
Three, my most gracious lord.

GLOUCESTER:

KING EDWARD IV:
'Twere pity they should lose their father's lands.

LADY GREY:
Be pitiful, dread lord, and grant it then.

KING EDWARD IV:
Lords, give us leave: I'll try this widow's wit.

GLOUCESTER:

KING EDWARD IV:
Now tell me, madam, do you love your children?

LADY GREY:
Ay, full as dearly as I love myself.

KING EDWARD IV:
And would you not do much to do them good?

LADY GREY:
To do them good, I would sustain some harm.

KING EDWARD IV:
Then get your husband's lands, to do them good.

LADY GREY:
Therefore I came unto your majesty.

KING EDWARD IV:
I'll tell you how these lands are to be got.

LADY GREY:
So shall you bind me to your highness' service.

KING EDWARD IV:
What service wilt thou do me, if I give them?

LADY GREY:
What you command, that rests in me to do.

KING EDWARD IV:
But you will take exceptions to my boon.

LADY GREY:
No, gracious lord, except I cannot do it.

KING EDWARD IV:
Ay, but thou canst do what I mean to ask.

LADY GREY:
Why, then I will do what your grace commands.

GLOUCESTER:

CLARENCE:

LADY GREY:
Why stops my lord, shall I not hear my task?

KING EDWARD IV:
An easy task; 'tis but to love a king.

LADY GREY:
That's soon perform'd, because I am a subject.

KING EDWARD IV:
Why, then, thy husband's lands I freely give thee.

LADY GREY:
I take my leave with many thousand thanks.

GLOUCESTER:

KING EDWARD IV:
But stay thee, 'tis the fruits of love I mean.

LADY GREY:
The fruits of love I mean, my loving liege.

KING EDWARD IV:
Ay, but, I fear me, in another sense.
What love, think'st thou, I sue so much to get?

LADY GREY:
My love till death, my humble thanks, my prayers;
That love which virtue begs and virtue grants.

KING EDWARD IV:
No, by my troth, I did not mean such love.

LADY GREY:
Why, then you mean not as I thought you did.

KING EDWARD IV:
But now you partly may perceive my mind.

LADY GREY:
My mind will never grant what I perceive
Your highness aims at, if I aim aright.

KING EDWARD IV:
To tell thee plain, I aim to lie with thee.

LADY GREY:
To tell you plain, I had rather lie in prison.

KING EDWARD IV:
Why, then thou shalt not have thy husband's lands.

LADY GREY:
Why, then mine honesty shall be my dower;
For by that loss I will not purchase them.

KING EDWARD IV:
Therein thou wrong'st thy children mightily.

LADY GREY:
Herein your highness wrongs both them and me.
But, mighty lord, this merry inclination
Accords not with the sadness of my suit:
Please you dismiss me either with 'ay' or 'no.'

KING EDWARD IV:
Ay, if thou wilt say 'ay' to my request;
No if thou dost say 'no' to my demand.

LADY GREY:
Then, no, my lord. My suit is at an end.

GLOUCESTER:

CLARENCE:

KING EDWARD IV:

LADY GREY:
'Tis better said than done, my gracious lord:
I am a subject fit to jest withal,
But far unfit to be a sovereign.

KING EDWARD IV:
Sweet widow, by my state I swear to thee
I speak no more than what my soul intends;
And that is, to enjoy thee for my love.

LADY GREY:
And that is more than I will yield unto:
I know I am too mean to be your queen,
And yet too good to be your concubine.

KING EDWARD IV:
You cavil, widow: I did mean, my queen.

LADY GREY:
'Twill grieve your grace my sons should call you father.

KING EDWARD IV:
No more than when my daughters call thee mother.
Thou art a widow, and thou hast some children;
And, by God's mother, I, being but a bachelor,
Have other some: why, 'tis a happy thing
To be the father unto many sons.
Answer no more, for thou shalt be my queen.

GLOUCESTER:

CLARENCE:

KING EDWARD IV:
Brothers, you muse what chat we two have had.

GLOUCESTER:
The widow likes it not, for she looks very sad.

KING EDWARD IV:
You'll think it strange if I should marry her.

CLARENCE:
To whom, my lord?

KING EDWARD IV:
Why, Clarence, to myself.

GLOUCESTER:
That would be ten days' wonder at the least.

CLARENCE:
That's a day longer than a wonder lasts.

GLOUCESTER:
By so much is the wonder in extremes.

KING EDWARD IV:
Well, jest on, brothers: I can tell you both
Her suit is granted for her husband's lands.

Nobleman:
My gracious lord, Henry your foe is taken,
And brought your prisoner to your palace gate.

KING EDWARD IV:
See that he be convey'd unto the Tower:
And go we, brothers, to the man that took him,
To question of his apprehension.
Widow, go you along. Lords, use her honourably.

GLOUCESTER:
Ay, Edward will use women honourably.
Would he were wasted, marrow, bones and all,
That from his loins no hopeful branch may spring,
To cross me from the golden time I look for!
And yet, between my soul's desire and me--
The lustful Edward's title buried--
Is Clarence, Henry, and his son young Edward,
And all the unlook'd for issue of their bodies,
To take their rooms, ere I can place myself:
A cold premeditation for my purpose!
Why, then, I do but dream on sovereignty;
Like one that stands upon a promontory,
And spies a far-off shore where he would tread,
Wishing his foot were equal with his eye,
And chides the sea that sunders him from thence,
Saying, he'll lade it dry to have his way:
So do I wish the crown, being so far off;
And so I chide the means that keeps me from it;
And so I say, I'll cut the causes off,
Flattering me with impossibilities.
My eye's too quick, my heart o'erweens too much,
Unless my hand and strength could equal them.
Well, say there is no kingdom then for Richard;
What other pleasure can the world afford?
I'll make my heaven in a lady's lap,
And deck my body in gay ornaments,
And witch sweet ladies with my words and looks.
O miserable thought! and more unlikely
Than to accomplish twenty golden crowns!
Why, love forswore me in my mother's womb:
And, for I should not deal in her soft laws,
She did corrupt frail nature with some bribe,
To shrink mine arm up like a wither'd shrub;
To make an envious mountain on my back,
Where sits deformity to mock my body;
To shape my legs of an unequal size;
To disproportion me in every part,
Like to a chaos, or an unlick'd bear-whelp
That carries no impression like the dam.
And am I then a man to be beloved?
O monstrous fault, to harbour such a thought!
Then, since this earth affords no joy to me,
But to command, to cheque, to o'erbear such
As are of better person than myself,
I'll make my heaven to dream upon the crown,
And, whiles I live, to account this world but hell,
Until my mis-shaped trunk that bears this head
Be round impaled with a glorious crown.
And yet I know not how to get the crown,
For many lives stand between me and home:
And I,--like one lost in a thorny wood,
That rends the thorns and is rent with the thorns,
Seeking a way and straying from the way;
Not knowing how to find the open air,
But toiling desperately to find it out,--
Torment myself to catch the English crown:
And from that torment I will free myself,
Or hew my way out with a bloody axe.
Why, I can smile, and murder whiles I smile,
And cry 'Content' to that which grieves my heart,
And wet my cheeks with artificial tears,
And frame my face to all occasions.
I'll drown more sailors than the mermaid shall;
I'll slay more gazers than the basilisk;
I'll play the orator as well as Nestor,
Deceive more slily than Ulysses could,
And, like a Sinon, take another Troy.
I can add colours to the chameleon,
Change shapes with Proteus for advantages,
And set the murderous Machiavel to school.
Can I do this, and cannot get a crown?
Tut, were it farther off, I'll pluck it down.
3 KING HENRY VI

KING LEWIS XI:
Fair Queen of England, worthy Margaret,
Sit down with us: it ill befits thy state
And birth, that thou shouldst stand while Lewis doth sit.

QUEEN MARGARET:
No, mighty King of France: now Margaret
Must strike her sail and learn awhile to serve
Where kings command. I was, I must confess,
Great Albion's queen in former golden days:
But now mischance hath trod my title down,
And with dishonour laid me on the ground;
Where I must take like seat unto my fortune,
And to my humble seat conform myself.

KING LEWIS XI:
Why, say, fair queen, whence springs this deep despair?

QUEEN MARGARET:
From such a cause as fills mine eyes with tears
And stops my tongue, while heart is drown'd in cares.

KING LEWIS XI:
Whate'er it be, be thou still like thyself,
And sit thee by our side:
Yield not thy neck
To fortune's yoke, but let thy dauntless mind
Still ride in triumph over all mischance.
Be plain, Queen Margaret, and tell thy grief;
It shall be eased, if France can yield relief.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Those gracious words revive my drooping thoughts
And give my tongue-tied sorrows leave to speak.
Now, therefore, be it known to noble Lewis,
That Henry, sole possessor of my love,
Is of a king become a banish'd man,
And forced to live in Scotland a forlorn;
While proud ambitious Edward Duke of York
Usurps the regal title and the seat
Of England's true-anointed lawful king.
This is the cause that I, poor Margaret,
With this my son, Prince Edward, Henry's heir,
Am come to crave thy just and lawful aid;
And if thou fail us, all our hope is done:
Scotland hath will to help, but cannot help;
Our people and our peers are both misled,
Our treasures seized, our soldiers put to flight,
And, as thou seest, ourselves in heavy plight.

KING LEWIS XI:
Renowned queen, with patience calm the storm,
While we bethink a means to break it off.

QUEEN MARGARET:
The more we stay, the stronger grows our foe.

KING LEWIS XI:
The more I stay, the more I'll succor thee.

QUEEN MARGARET:
O, but impatience waiteth on true sorrow.
And see where comes the breeder of my sorrow!

KING LEWIS XI:
What's he approacheth boldly to our presence?

QUEEN MARGARET:
Our Earl of Warwick, Edward's greatest friend.

KING LEWIS XI:
Welcome, brave Warwick! What brings thee to France?

QUEEN MARGARET:
Ay, now begins a second storm to rise;
For this is he that moves both wind and tide.

WARWICK:
From worthy Edward, King of Albion,
My lord and sovereign, and thy vowed friend,
I come, in kindness and unfeigned love,
First, to do greetings to thy royal person;
And then to crave a league of amity;
And lastly, to confirm that amity
With a nuptial knot, if thou vouchsafe to grant
That virtuous Lady Bona, thy fair sister,
To England's king in lawful marriage.

QUEEN MARGARET:

WARWICK:

QUEEN MARGARET:
King Lewis and Lady Bona, hear me speak,
Before you answer Warwick. His demand
Springs not from Edward's well-meant honest love,
But from deceit bred by necessity;
For how can tyrants safely govern home,
Unless abroad they purchase great alliance?
To prove him tyrant this reason may suffice,
That Henry liveth still: but were he dead,
Yet here Prince Edward stands, King Henry's son.
Look, therefore, Lewis, that by this league and marriage
Thou draw not on thy danger and dishonour;
For though usurpers sway the rule awhile,
Yet heavens are just, and time suppresseth wrongs.

WARWICK:
Injurious Margaret!

PRINCE EDWARD:
And why not queen?

WARWICK:
Because thy father Henry did usurp;
And thou no more are prince than she is queen.

OXFORD:
Then Warwick disannuls great John of Gaunt,
Which did subdue the greatest part of Spain;
And, after John of Gaunt, Henry the Fourth,
Whose wisdom was a mirror to the wisest;
And, after that wise prince, Henry the Fifth,
Who by his prowess conquered all France:
From these our Henry lineally descends.

WARWICK:
Oxford, how haps it, in this smooth discourse,
You told not how Henry the Sixth hath lost
All that which Henry Fifth had gotten?
Methinks these peers of France should smile at that.
But for the rest, you tell a pedigree
Of threescore and two years; a silly time
To make prescription for a kingdom's worth.

OXFORD:
Why, Warwick, canst thou speak against thy liege,
Whom thou obeyed'st thirty and six years,
And not bewray thy treason with a blush?

WARWICK:
Can Oxford, that did ever fence the right,
Now buckler falsehood with a pedigree?
For shame! leave Henry, and call Edward king.

OXFORD:
Call him my king by whose injurious doom
My elder brother, the Lord Aubrey Vere,
Was done to death? and more than so, my father,
Even in the downfall of his mellow'd years,
When nature brought him to the door of death?
No, Warwick, no; while life upholds this arm,
This arm upholds the house of Lancaster.

WARWICK:
And I the house of York.

KING LEWIS XI:
Queen Margaret, Prince Edward, and Oxford,
Vouchsafe, at our request, to stand aside,
While I use further conference with Warwick.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Heavens grant that Warwick's words bewitch him not!

KING LEWIS XI:
Now Warwick, tell me, even upon thy conscience,
Is Edward your true king? for I were loath
To link with him that were not lawful chosen.

WARWICK:
Thereon I pawn my credit and mine honour.

KING LEWIS XI:
But is he gracious in the people's eye?

WARWICK:
The more that Henry was unfortunate.

KING LEWIS XI:
Then further, all dissembling set aside,
Tell me for truth the measure of his love
Unto our sister Bona.

WARWICK:
Such it seems
As may beseem a monarch like himself.
Myself have often heard him say and swear
That this his love was an eternal plant,
Whereof the root was fix'd in virtue's ground,
The leaves and fruit maintain'd with beauty's sun,
Exempt from envy, but not from disdain,
Unless the Lady Bona quit his pain.

KING LEWIS XI:
Now, sister, let us hear your firm resolve.

BONA:
Your grant, or your denial, shall be mine:
Yet I confess that often ere this day,
When I have heard your king's desert recounted,
Mine ear hath tempted judgment to desire.

KING LEWIS XI:
Then, Warwick, thus: our sister shall be Edward's;
And now forthwith shall articles be drawn
Touching the jointure that your king must make,
Which with her dowry shall be counterpoised.
Draw near, Queen Margaret, and be a witness
That Bona shall be wife to the English king.

PRINCE EDWARD:
To Edward, but not to the English king.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Deceitful Warwick! it was thy device
By this alliance to make void my suit:
Before thy coming Lewis was Henry's friend.

KING LEWIS XI:
And still is friend to him and Margaret:
But if your title to the crown be weak,
As may appear by Edward's good success,
Then 'tis but reason that I be released
From giving aid which late I promised.
Yet shall you have all kindness at my hand
That your estate requires and mine can yield.

WARWICK:
Henry now lives in Scotland at his ease,
Where having nothing, nothing can he lose.
And as for you yourself, our quondam queen,
You have a father able to maintain you;
And better 'twere you troubled him than France.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Peace, impudent and shameless Warwick, peace,
Proud setter up and puller down of kings!
I will not hence, till, with my talk and tears,
Both full of truth, I make King Lewis behold
Thy sly conveyance and thy lord's false love;
For both of you are birds of selfsame feather.

KING LEWIS XI:
Warwick, this is some post to us or thee.

Post:

OXFORD:
I like it well that our fair queen and mistress
Smiles at her news, while Warwick frowns at his.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Nay, mark how Lewis stamps, as he were nettled:
I hope all's for the best.

KING LEWIS XI:
Warwick, what are thy news? and yours, fair queen?

QUEEN MARGARET:
Mine, such as fill my heart with unhoped joys.

WARWICK:
Mine, full of sorrow and heart's discontent.

KING LEWIS XI:
What! has your king married the Lady Grey!
And now, to soothe your forgery and his,
Sends me a paper to persuade me patience?
Is this the alliance that he seeks with France?
Dare he presume to scorn us in this manner?

QUEEN MARGARET:
I told your majesty as much before:
This proveth Edward's love and Warwick's honesty.

WARWICK:
King Lewis, I here protest, in sight of heaven,
And by the hope I have of heavenly bliss,
That I am clear from this misdeed of Edward's,
No more my king, for he dishonours me,
But most himself, if he could see his shame.
Did I forget that by the house of York
My father came untimely to his death?
Did I let pass the abuse done to my niece?
Did I impale him with the regal crown?
Did I put Henry from his native right?
And am I guerdon'd at the last with shame?
Shame on himself! for my desert is honour:
And to repair my honour lost for him,
I here renounce him and return to Henry.
My noble queen, let former grudges pass,
And henceforth I am thy true servitor:
I will revenge his wrong to Lady Bona,
And replant Henry in his former state.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Warwick, these words have turn'd my hate to love;
And I forgive and quite forget old faults,
And joy that thou becomest King Henry's friend.

WARWICK:
So much his friend, ay, his unfeigned friend,
That, if King Lewis vouchsafe to furnish us
With some few bands of chosen soldiers,
I'll undertake to land them on our coast
And force the tyrant from his seat by war.
'Tis not his new-made bride shall succor him:
And as for Clarence, as my letters tell me,
He's very likely now to fall from him,
For matching more for wanton lust than honour,
Or than for strength and safety of our country.

BONA:
Dear brother, how shall Bona be revenged
But by thy help to this distressed queen?

QUEEN MARGARET:
Renowned prince, how shall poor Henry live,
Unless thou rescue him from foul despair?

BONA:
My quarrel and this English queen's are one.

WARWICK:
And mine, fair lady Bona, joins with yours.

KING LEWIS XI:
And mine with hers, and thine, and Margaret's.
Therefore at last I firmly am resolved
You shall have aid.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Let me give humble thanks for all at once.

KING LEWIS XI:
Then, England's messenger, return in post,
And tell false Edward, thy supposed king,
That Lewis of France is sending over masquers
To revel it with him and his new bride:
Thou seest what's past, go fear thy king withal.

BONA:
Tell him, in hope he'll prove a widower shortly,
I'll wear the willow garland for his sake.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Tell him, my mourning weeds are laid aside,
And I am ready to put armour on.

WARWICK:
Tell him from me that he hath done me wrong,
And therefore I'll uncrown him ere't be long.
There's thy reward: be gone.

KING LEWIS XI:
But, Warwick,
Thou and Oxford, with five thousand men,
Shall cross the seas, and bid false Edward battle;
And, as occasion serves, this noble queen
And prince shall follow with a fresh supply.
Yet, ere thou go, but answer me one doubt,
What pledge have we of thy firm loyalty?

WARWICK:
This shall assure my constant loyalty,
That if our queen and this young prince agree,
I'll join mine eldest daughter and my joy
To him forthwith in holy wedlock bands.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Yes, I agree, and thank you for your motion.
Son Edward, she is fair and virtuous,
Therefore delay not, give thy hand to Warwick;
And, with thy hand, thy faith irrevocable,
That only Warwick's daughter shall be thine.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Yes, I accept her, for she well deserves it;
And here, to pledge my vow, I give my hand.

KING LEWIS XI:
Why stay we now? These soldiers shall be levied,
And thou, Lord Bourbon, our high admiral,
Shalt waft them over with our royal fleet.
I long till Edward fall by war's mischance,
For mocking marriage with a dame of France.

WARWICK:
I came from Edward as ambassador,
But I return his sworn and mortal foe:
Matter of marriage was the charge he gave me,
But dreadful war shall answer his demand.
Had he none else to make a stale but me?
Then none but I shall turn his jest to sorrow.
I was the chief that raised him to the crown,
And I'll be chief to bring him down again:
Not that I pity Henry's misery,
But seek revenge on Edward's mockery.
3 KING HENRY VI

GLOUCESTER:
Now tell me, brother Clarence, what think you
Of this new marriage with the Lady Grey?
Hath not our brother made a worthy choice?

CLARENCE:
Alas, you know, 'tis far from hence to France;
How could he stay till Warwick made return?

SOMERSET:
My lords, forbear this talk; here comes the king.

GLOUCESTER:
And his well-chosen bride.

CLARENCE:
I mind to tell him plainly what I think.

KING EDWARD IV:
Now, brother of Clarence, how like you our choice,
That you stand pensive, as half malcontent?

CLARENCE:
As well as Lewis of France, or the Earl of Warwick,
Which are so weak of courage and in judgment
That they'll take no offence at our abuse.

KING EDWARD IV:
Suppose they take offence without a cause,
They are but Lewis and Warwick: I am Edward,
Your king and Warwick's, and must have my will.

GLOUCESTER:
And shall have your will, because our king:
Yet hasty marriage seldom proveth well.

KING EDWARD IV:
Yea, brother Richard, are you offended too?

GLOUCESTER:
Not I:
No, God forbid that I should wish them sever'd
Whom God hath join'd together; ay, and 'twere pity
To sunder them that yoke so well together.

KING EDWARD IV:
Setting your scorns and your mislike aside,
Tell me some reason why the Lady Grey
Should not become my wife and England's queen.
And you too, Somerset and Montague,
Speak freely what you think.

CLARENCE:
Then this is mine opinion: that King Lewis
Becomes your enemy, for mocking him
About the marriage of the Lady Bona.

GLOUCESTER:
And Warwick, doing what you gave in charge,
Is now dishonoured by this new marriage.

KING EDWARD IV:
What if both Lewis and Warwick be appeased
By such invention as I can devise?

MONTAGUE:
Yet, to have join'd with France in such alliance
Would more have strengthen'd this our commonwealth
'Gainst foreign storms than any home-bred marriage.

HASTINGS:
Why, knows not Montague that of itself
England is safe, if true within itself?

MONTAGUE:
But the safer when 'tis back'd with France.

HASTINGS:
'Tis better using France than trusting France:
Let us be back'd with God and with the seas
Which He hath given for fence impregnable,
And with their helps only defend ourselves;
In them and in ourselves our safety lies.

CLARENCE:
For this one speech Lord Hastings well deserves
To have the heir of the Lord Hungerford.

KING EDWARD IV:
Ay, what of that? it was my will and grant;
And for this once my will shall stand for law.

GLOUCESTER:
And yet methinks your grace hath not done well,
To give the heir and daughter of Lord Scales
Unto the brother of your loving bride;
She better would have fitted me or Clarence:
But in your bride you bury brotherhood.

CLARENCE:
Or else you would not have bestow'd the heir
Of the Lord Bonville on your new wife's son,
And leave your brothers to go speed elsewhere.

KING EDWARD IV:
Alas, poor Clarence! is it for a wife
That thou art malcontent? I will provide thee.

CLARENCE:
In choosing for yourself, you show'd your judgment,
Which being shallow, you give me leave
To play the broker in mine own behalf;
And to that end I shortly mind to leave you.

KING EDWARD IV:
Leave me, or tarry, Edward will be king,
And not be tied unto his brother's will.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
My lords, before it pleased his majesty
To raise my state to title of a queen,
Do me but right, and you must all confess
That I was not ignoble of descent;
And meaner than myself have had like fortune.
But as this title honours me and mine,
So your dislike, to whom I would be pleasing,
Doth cloud my joys with danger and with sorrow.

KING EDWARD IV:
My love, forbear to fawn upon their frowns:
What danger or what sorrow can befall thee,
So long as Edward is thy constant friend,
And their true sovereign, whom they must obey?
Nay, whom they shall obey, and love thee too,
Unless they seek for hatred at my hands;
Which if they do, yet will I keep thee safe,
And they shall feel the vengeance of my wrath.

GLOUCESTER:

KING EDWARD IV:
Now, messenger, what letters or what news
From France?

Post:
My sovereign liege, no letters; and few words,
But such as I, without your special pardon,
Dare not relate.

KING EDWARD IV:
Go to, we pardon thee: therefore, in brief,
Tell me their words as near as thou canst guess them.
What answer makes King Lewis unto our letters?

Post:
At my depart, these were his very words:
'Go tell false Edward, thy supposed king,
That Lewis of France is sending over masquers
To revel it with him and his new bride.'

KING EDWARD IV:
Is Lewis so brave? belike he thinks me Henry.
But what said Lady Bona to my marriage?

Post:
These were her words, utter'd with mad disdain:
'Tell him, in hope he'll prove a widower shortly,
I'll wear the willow garland for his sake.'

KING EDWARD IV:
I blame not her, she could say little less;
She had the wrong. But what said Henry's queen?
For I have heard that she was there in place.

Post:
'Tell him,' quoth she, 'my mourning weeds are done,
And I am ready to put armour on.'

KING EDWARD IV:
Belike she minds to play the Amazon.
But what said Warwick to these injuries?

Post:
He, more incensed against your majesty
Than all the rest, discharged me with these words:
'Tell him from me that he hath done me wrong,
And therefore I'll uncrown him ere't be long.'

KING EDWARD IV:
Ha! durst the traitor breathe out so proud words?
Well I will arm me, being thus forewarn'd:
They shall have wars and pay for their presumption.
But say, is Warwick friends with Margaret?

Post:
Ay, gracious sovereign; they are so link'd in
friendship
That young Prince Edward marries Warwick's daughter.

CLARENCE:
Belike the elder; Clarence will have the younger.
Now, brother king, farewell, and sit you fast,
For I will hence to Warwick's other daughter;
That, though I want a kingdom, yet in marriage
I may not prove inferior to yourself.
You that love me and Warwick, follow me.

GLOUCESTER:

KING EDWARD IV:
Clarence and Somerset both gone to Warwick!
Yet am I arm'd against the worst can happen;
And haste is needful in this desperate case.
Pembroke and Stafford, you in our behalf
Go levy men, and make prepare for war;
They are already, or quickly will be landed:
Myself in person will straight follow you.
But, ere I go, Hastings and Montague,
Resolve my doubt. You twain, of all the rest,
Are near to Warwick by blood and by alliance:
Tell me if you love Warwick more than me?
If it be so, then both depart to him;
I rather wish you foes than hollow friends:
But if you mind to hold your true obedience,
Give me assurance with some friendly vow,
That I may never have you in suspect.

MONTAGUE:
So God help Montague as he proves true!

HASTINGS:
And Hastings as he favours Edward's cause!

KING EDWARD IV:
Now, brother Richard, will you stand by us?

GLOUCESTER:
Ay, in despite of all that shall withstand you.

KING EDWARD IV:
Why, so! then am I sure of victory.
Now therefore let us hence; and lose no hour,
Till we meet Warwick with his foreign power.
3 KING HENRY VI

WARWICK:
Trust me, my lord, all hitherto goes well;
The common people by numbers swarm to us.
But see where Somerset and Clarence come!
Speak suddenly, my lords, are we all friends?

CLARENCE:
Fear not that, my lord.

WARWICK:
Then, gentle Clarence, welcome unto Warwick;
And welcome, Somerset: I hold it cowardice
To rest mistrustful where a noble heart
Hath pawn'd an open hand in sign of love;
Else might I think that Clarence, Edward's brother,
Were but a feigned friend to our proceedings:
But welcome, sweet Clarence; my daughter shall be thine.
And now what rests but, in night's coverture,
Thy brother being carelessly encamp'd,
His soldiers lurking in the towns about,
And but attended by a simple guard,
We may surprise and take him at our pleasure?
Our scouts have found the adventure very easy:
That as Ulysses and stout Diomede
With sleight and manhood stole to Rhesus' tents,
And brought from thence the Thracian fatal steeds,
So we, well cover'd with the night's black mantle,
At unawares may beat down Edward's guard
And seize himself; I say not, slaughter him,
For I intend but only to surprise him.
You that will follow me to this attempt,
Applaud the name of Henry with your leader.
Why, then, let's on our way in silent sort:
For Warwick and his friends, God and Saint George!
3 KING HENRY VI

First Watchman:
Come on, my masters, each man take his stand:
The king by this is set him down to sleep.

Second Watchman:
What, will he not to bed?

First Watchman:
Why, no; for he hath made a solemn vow
Never to lie and take his natural rest
Till Warwick or himself be quite suppress'd.

Second Watchman:
To-morrow then belike shall be the day,
If Warwick be so near as men report.

Third Watchman:
But say, I pray, what nobleman is that
That with the king here resteth in his tent?

First Watchman:
'Tis the Lord Hastings, the king's chiefest friend.

Third Watchman:
O, is it so? But why commands the king
That his chief followers lodge in towns about him,
While he himself keeps in the cold field?

Second Watchman:
'Tis the more honour, because more dangerous.

Third Watchman:
Ay, but give me worship and quietness;
I like it better than a dangerous honour.
If Warwick knew in what estate he stands,
'Tis to be doubted he would waken him.

First Watchman:
Unless our halberds did shut up his passage.

Second Watchman:
Ay, wherefore else guard we his royal tent,
But to defend his person from night-foes?

WARWICK:
This is his tent; and see where stand his guard.
Courage, my masters! honour now or never!
But follow me, and Edward shall be ours.

First Watchman:
Who goes there?

Second Watchman:
Stay, or thou diest!

SOMERSET:
What are they that fly there?

WARWICK:
Richard and Hastings: let them go; here is The duke.

KING EDWARD IV:
The duke! Why, Warwick, when we parted,
Thou call'dst me king.

WARWICK:
Ay, but the case is alter'd:
When you disgraced me in my embassade,
Then I degraded you from being king,
And come now to create you Duke of York.
Alas! how should you govern any kingdom,
That know not how to use ambassadors,
Nor how to be contented with one wife,
Nor how to use your brothers brotherly,
Nor how to study for the people's welfare,
Nor how to shroud yourself from enemies?

KING EDWARD IV:
Yea, brother of Clarence, are thou here too?
Nay, then I see that Edward needs must down.
Yet, Warwick, in despite of all mischance,
Of thee thyself and all thy complices,
Edward will always bear himself as king:
Though fortune's malice overthrow my state,
My mind exceeds the compass of her wheel.

WARWICK:
Then, for his mind, be Edward England's king:
But Henry now shall wear the English crown,
And be true king indeed, thou but the shadow.
My Lord of Somerset, at my request,
See that forthwith Duke Edward be convey'd
Unto my brother, Archbishop of York.
When I have fought with Pembroke and his fellows,
I'll follow you, and tell what answer
Lewis and the Lady Bona send to him.
Now, for a while farewell, good Duke of York.

KING EDWARD IV:
What fates impose, that men must needs abide;
It boots not to resist both wind and tide.

OXFORD:
What now remains, my lords, for us to do
But march to London with our soldiers?

WARWICK:
Ay, that's the first thing that we have to do;
To free King Henry from imprisonment
And see him seated in the regal throne.
3 KING HENRY VI

RIVERS:
Madam, what makes you in this sudden change?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Why brother Rivers, are you yet to learn
What late misfortune is befall'n King Edward?

RIVERS:
What! loss of some pitch'd battle against Warwick?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
No, but the loss of his own royal person.

RIVERS:
Then is my sovereign slain?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Ay, almost slain, for he is taken prisoner,
Either betray'd by falsehood of his guard
Or by his foe surprised at unawares:
And, as I further have to understand,
Is new committed to the Bishop of York,
Fell Warwick's brother and by that our foe.

RIVERS:
These news I must confess are full of grief;
Yet, gracious madam, bear it as you may:
Warwick may lose, that now hath won the day.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Till then fair hope must hinder life's decay.
And I the rather wean me from despair
For love of Edward's offspring in my womb:
This is it that makes me bridle passion
And bear with mildness my misfortune's cross;
Ay, ay, for this I draw in many a tear
And stop the rising of blood-sucking sighs,
Lest with my sighs or tears I blast or drown
King Edward's fruit, true heir to the English crown.

RIVERS:
But, madam, where is Warwick then become?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
I am inform'd that he comes towards London,
To set the crown once more on Henry's head:
Guess thou the rest; King Edward's friends must down,
But, to prevent the tyrant's violence,--
For trust not him that hath once broken faith,--
I'll hence forthwith unto the sanctuary,
To save at least the heir of Edward's right:
There shall I rest secure from force and fraud.
Come, therefore, let us fly while we may fly:
If Warwick take us we are sure to die.
3 KING HENRY VI

GLOUCESTER:
Now, my Lord Hastings and Sir William Stanley,
Leave off to wonder why I drew you hither,
Into this chiefest thicket of the park.
Thus stands the case: you know our king, my brother,
Is prisoner to the bishop here, at whose hands
He hath good usage and great liberty,
And, often but attended with weak guard,
Comes hunting this way to disport himself.
I have advertised him by secret means
That if about this hour he make his way
Under the colour of his usual game,
He shall here find his friends with horse and men
To set him free from his captivity.

Huntsman:
This way, my lord; for this way lies the game.

KING EDWARD IV:
Nay, this way, man: see where the huntsmen stand.
Now, brother of Gloucester, Lord Hastings, and the rest,
Stand you thus close, to steal the bishop's deer?

GLOUCESTER:
Brother, the time and case requireth haste:
Your horse stands ready at the park-corner.

KING EDWARD IV:
But whither shall we then?

HASTINGS:
To Lynn, my lord,
And ship from thence to Flanders.

GLOUCESTER:
Well guess'd, believe me; for that was my meaning.

KING EDWARD IV:
Stanley, I will requite thy forwardness.

GLOUCESTER:
But wherefore stay we? 'tis no time to talk.

KING EDWARD IV:
Huntsman, what say'st thou? wilt thou go along?

Huntsman:
Better do so than tarry and be hang'd.

GLOUCESTER:
Come then, away; let's ha' no more ado.

KING EDWARD IV:
Bishop, farewell: shield thee from Warwick's frown;
And pray that I may repossess the crown.
3 KING HENRY VI

KING HENRY VI:
Master lieutenant, now that God and friends
Have shaken Edward from the regal seat,
And turn'd my captive state to liberty,
My fear to hope, my sorrows unto joys,
At our enlargement what are thy due fees?

Lieutenant:
Subjects may challenge nothing of their sovereigns;
But if an humble prayer may prevail,
I then crave pardon of your majesty.

KING HENRY VI:
For what, lieutenant? for well using me?
Nay, be thou sure I'll well requite thy kindness,
For that it made my imprisonment a pleasure;
Ay, such a pleasure as incaged birds
Conceive when after many moody thoughts
At last by notes of household harmony
They quite forget their loss of liberty.
But, Warwick, after God, thou set'st me free,
And chiefly therefore I thank God and thee;
He was the author, thou the instrument.
Therefore, that I may conquer fortune's spite
By living low, where fortune cannot hurt me,
And that the people of this blessed land
May not be punish'd with my thwarting stars,
Warwick, although my head still wear the crown,
I here resign my government to thee,
For thou art fortunate in all thy deeds.

WARWICK:
Your grace hath still been famed for virtuous;
And now may seem as wise as virtuous,
By spying and avoiding fortune's malice,
For few men rightly temper with the stars:
Yet in this one thing let me blame your grace,
For choosing me when Clarence is in place.

CLARENCE:
No, Warwick, thou art worthy of the sway,
To whom the heavens in thy nativity
Adjudged an olive branch and laurel crown,
As likely to be blest in peace and war;
And therefore I yield thee my free consent.

WARWICK:
And I choose Clarence only for protector.

KING HENRY VI:
Warwick and Clarence give me both your hands:
Now join your hands, and with your hands your hearts,
That no dissension hinder government:
I make you both protectors of this land,
While I myself will lead a private life
And in devotion spend my latter days,
To sin's rebuke and my Creator's praise.

WARWICK:
What answers Clarence to his sovereign's will?

CLARENCE:
That he consents, if Warwick yield consent;
For on thy fortune I repose myself.

WARWICK:
Why, then, though loath, yet must I be content:
We'll yoke together, like a double shadow
To Henry's body, and supply his place;
I mean, in bearing weight of government,
While he enjoys the honour and his ease.
And, Clarence, now then it is more than needful
Forthwith that Edward be pronounced a traitor,
And all his lands and goods be confiscate.

CLARENCE:
What else? and that succession be determined.

WARWICK:
Ay, therein Clarence shall not want his part.

KING HENRY VI:
But, with the first of all your chief affairs,
Let me entreat, for I command no more,
That Margaret your queen and my son Edward
Be sent for, to return from France with speed;
For, till I see them here, by doubtful fear
My joy of liberty is half eclipsed.

CLARENCE:
It shall be done, my sovereign, with all speed.

KING HENRY VI:
My Lord of Somerset, what youth is that,
Of whom you seem to have so tender care?

SOMERSET:
My liege, it is young Henry, earl of Richmond.

KING HENRY VI:
Come hither, England's hope.
If secret powers
Suggest but truth to my divining thoughts,
This pretty lad will prove our country's bliss.
His looks are full of peaceful majesty,
His head by nature framed to wear a crown,
His hand to wield a sceptre, and himself
Likely in time to bless a regal throne.
Make much of him, my lords, for this is he
Must help you more than you are hurt by me.

WARWICK:
What news, my friend?

Post:
That Edward is escaped from your brother,
And fled, as he hears since, to Burgundy.

WARWICK:
Unsavoury news! but how made he escape?

Post:
He was convey'd by Richard Duke of Gloucester
And the Lord Hastings, who attended him
In secret ambush on the forest side
And from the bishop's huntsmen rescued him;
For hunting was his daily exercise.

WARWICK:
My brother was too careless of his charge.
But let us hence, my sovereign, to provide
A salve for any sore that may betide.

SOMERSET:
My lord, I like not of this flight of Edward's;
For doubtless Burgundy will yield him help,
And we shall have more wars before 't be long.
As Henry's late presaging prophecy
Did glad my heart with hope of this young Richmond,
So doth my heart misgive me, in these conflicts
What may befall him, to his harm and ours:
Therefore, Lord Oxford, to prevent the worst,
Forthwith we'll send him hence to Brittany,
Till storms be past of civil enmity.

OXFORD:
Ay, for if Edward repossess the crown,
'Tis like that Richmond with the rest shall down.

SOMERSET:
It shall be so; he shall to Brittany.
Come, therefore, let's about it speedily.
3 KING HENRY VI

KING EDWARD IV:
Now, brother Richard, Lord Hastings, and the rest,
Yet thus far fortune maketh us amends,
And says that once more I shall interchange
My waned state for Henry's regal crown.
Well have we pass'd and now repass'd the seas
And brought desired help from Burgundy:
What then remains, we being thus arrived
From Ravenspurgh haven before the gates of York,
But that we enter, as into our dukedom?

GLOUCESTER:
The gates made fast! Brother, I like not this;
For many men that stumble at the threshold
Are well foretold that danger lurks within.

KING EDWARD IV:
Tush, man, abodements must not now affright us:
By fair or foul means we must enter in,
For hither will our friends repair to us.

HASTINGS:
My liege, I'll knock once more to summon them.

Mayor:
My lords, we were forewarned of your coming,
And shut the gates for safety of ourselves;
For now we owe allegiance unto Henry.

KING EDWARD IV:
But, master mayor, if Henry be your king,
Yet Edward at the least is Duke of York.

Mayor:
True, my good lord; I know you for no less.

KING EDWARD IV:
Why, and I challenge nothing but my dukedom,
As being well content with that alone.

GLOUCESTER:

HASTINGS:
Why, master mayor, why stand you in a doubt?
Open the gates; we are King Henry's friends.

Mayor:
Ay, say you so? the gates shall then be open'd.

GLOUCESTER:
A wise stout captain, and soon persuaded!

HASTINGS:
The good old man would fain that all were well,
So 'twere not 'long of him; but being enter'd,
I doubt not, I, but we shall soon persuade
Both him and all his brothers unto reason.

KING EDWARD IV:
So, master mayor: these gates must not be shut
But in the night or in the time of war.
What! fear not, man, but yield me up the keys;
For Edward will defend the town and thee,
And all those friends that deign to follow me.

GLOUCESTER:
Brother, this is Sir John Montgomery,
Our trusty friend, unless I be deceived.

KING EDWARD IV:
Welcome, Sir John! But why come you in arms?

MONTAGUE:
To help King Edward in his time of storm,
As every loyal subject ought to do.

KING EDWARD IV:
Thanks, good Montgomery; but we now forget
Our title to the crown and only claim
Our dukedom till God please to send the rest.

MONTAGUE:
Then fare you well, for I will hence again:
I came to serve a king and not a duke.
Drummer, strike up, and let us march away.

KING EDWARD IV:
Nay, stay, Sir John, awhile, and we'll debate
By what safe means the crown may be recover'd.

MONTAGUE:
What talk you of debating? in few words,
If you'll not here proclaim yourself our king,
I'll leave you to your fortune and be gone
To keep them back that come to succor you:
Why shall we fight, if you pretend no title?

GLOUCESTER:
Why, brother, wherefore stand you on nice points?

KING EDWARD IV:
When we grow stronger, then we'll make our claim:
Till then, 'tis wisdom to conceal our meaning.

HASTINGS:
Away with scrupulous wit! now arms must rule.

GLOUCESTER:
And fearless minds climb soonest unto crowns.
Brother, we will proclaim you out of hand:
The bruit thereof will bring you many friends.

KING EDWARD IV:
Then be it as you will; for 'tis my right,
And Henry but usurps the diadem.

MONTAGUE:
Ay, now my sovereign speaketh like himself;
And now will I be Edward's champion.

HASTINGS:
Sound trumpet; Edward shall be here proclaim'd:
Come, fellow-soldier, make thou proclamation.

Soldier:
Edward the Fourth, by the grace of God, king of
England and France, and lord of Ireland, &c.

MONTAGUE:
And whosoe'er gainsays King Edward's right,
By this I challenge him to single fight.

All:
Long live Edward the Fourth!

KING EDWARD IV:
Thanks, brave Montgomery; and thanks unto you all:
If fortune serve me, I'll requite this kindness.
Now, for this night, let's harbour here in York;
And when the morning sun shall raise his car
Above the border of this horizon,
We'll forward towards Warwick and his mates;
For well I wot that Henry is no soldier.
Ah, froward Clarence! how evil it beseems thee
To flatter Henry and forsake thy brother!
Yet, as we may, we'll meet both thee and Warwick.
Come on, brave soldiers: doubt not of the day,
And, that once gotten, doubt not of large pay.
3 KING HENRY VI

WARWICK:
What counsel, lords? Edward from Belgia,
With hasty Germans and blunt Hollanders,
Hath pass'd in safety through the narrow seas,
And with his troops doth march amain to London;
And many giddy people flock to him.

KING HENRY VI:
Let's levy men, and beat him back again.

CLARENCE:
A little fire is quickly trodden out;
Which, being suffer'd, rivers cannot quench.

WARWICK:
In Warwickshire I have true-hearted friends,


--- End of file: shakespear_12.txt ---

Not mutinous in peace, yet bold in war;
Those will I muster up: and thou, son Clarence,
Shalt stir up in Suffolk, Norfolk, and in Kent,
The knights and gentlemen to come with thee:
Thou, brother Montague, in Buckingham,
Northampton and in Leicestershire, shalt find
Men well inclined to hear what thou command'st:
And thou, brave Oxford, wondrous well beloved,
In Oxfordshire shalt muster up thy friends.
My sovereign, with the loving citizens,
Like to his island girt in with the ocean,
Or modest Dian circled with her nymphs,
Shall rest in London till we come to him.
Fair lords, take leave and stand not to reply.
Farewell, my sovereign.

KING HENRY VI:
Farewell, my Hector, and my Troy's true hope.

CLARENCE:
In sign of truth, I kiss your highness' hand.

KING HENRY VI:
Well-minded Clarence, be thou fortunate!

MONTAGUE:
Comfort, my lord; and so I take my leave.

OXFORD:
And thus I seal my truth, and bid adieu.

KING HENRY VI:
Sweet Oxford, and my loving Montague,
And all at once, once more a happy farewell.

WARWICK:
Farewell, sweet lords: let's meet at Coventry.

KING HENRY VI:
Here at the palace I will rest awhile.
Cousin of Exeter, what thinks your lordship?
Methinks the power that Edward hath in field
Should not be able to encounter mine.

EXETER:
The doubt is that he will seduce the rest.

KING HENRY VI:
That's not my fear; my meed hath got me fame:
I have not stopp'd mine ears to their demands,
Nor posted off their suits with slow delays;
My pity hath been balm to heal their wounds,
My mildness hath allay'd their swelling griefs,
My mercy dried their water-flowing tears;
I have not been desirous of their wealth,
Nor much oppress'd them with great subsidies.
Nor forward of revenge, though they much err'd:
Then why should they love Edward more than me?
No, Exeter, these graces challenge grace:
And when the lion fawns upon the lamb,
The lamb will never cease to follow him.

EXETER:
Hark, hark, my lord! what shouts are these?

KING EDWARD IV:
Seize on the shame-faced Henry, bear him hence;
And once again proclaim us King of England.
You are the fount that makes small brooks to flow:
Now stops thy spring; my sea sha$l suck them dry,
And swell so much the higher by their ebb.
Hence with him to the Tower; let him not speak.
And, lords, towards Coventry bend we our course
Where peremptory Warwick now remains:
The sun shines hot; and, if we use delay,
Cold biting winter mars our hoped-for hay.

GLOUCESTER:
Away betimes, before his forces join,
And take the great-grown traitor unawares:
Brave warriors, march amain towards Coventry.
3 KING HENRY VI

WARWICK:
Where is the post that came from valiant Oxford?
How far hence is thy lord, mine honest fellow?

First Messenger:
By this at Dunsmore, marching hitherward.

WARWICK:
How far off is our brother Montague?
Where is the post that came from Montague?

Second Messenger:
By this at Daintry, with a puissant troop.

WARWICK:
Say, Somerville, what says my loving son?
And, by thy guess, how nigh is Clarence now?

SOMERSET:
At Southam I did leave him with his forces,
And do expect him here some two hours hence.

WARWICK:
Then Clarence is at hand, I hear his drum.

SOMERSET:
It is not his, my lord; here Southam lies:
The drum your honour hears marcheth from Warwick.

WARWICK:
Who should that be? belike, unlook'd-for friends.

SOMERSET:
They are at hand, and you shall quickly know.

KING EDWARD IV:
Go, trumpet, to the walls, and sound a parle.

GLOUCESTER:
See how the surly Warwick mans the wall!

WARWICK:
O unbid spite! is sportful Edward come?
Where slept our scouts, or how are they seduced,
That we could hear no news of his repair?

KING EDWARD IV:
Now, Warwick, wilt thou ope the city gates,
Speak gentle words and humbly bend thy knee,
Call Edward king and at his hands beg mercy?
And he shall pardon thee these outrages.

WARWICK:
Nay, rather, wilt thou draw thy forces hence,
Confess who set thee up and pluck'd thee own,
Call Warwick patron and be penitent?
And thou shalt still remain the Duke of York.

GLOUCESTER:
I thought, at least, he would have said the king;
Or did he make the jest against his will?

WARWICK:
Is not a dukedom, sir, a goodly gift?

GLOUCESTER:
Ay, by my faith, for a poor earl to give:
I'll do thee service for so good a gift.

WARWICK:
'Twas I that gave the kingdom to thy brother.

KING EDWARD IV:
Why then 'tis mine, if but by Warwick's gift.

WARWICK:
Thou art no Atlas for so great a weight:
And weakling, Warwick takes his gift again;
And Henry is my king, Warwick his subject.

KING EDWARD IV:
But Warwick's king is Edward's prisoner:
And, gallant Warwick, do but answer this:
What is the body when the head is off?

GLOUCESTER:
Alas, that Warwick had no more forecast,
But, whiles he thought to steal the single ten,
The king was slily finger'd from the deck!
You left poor Henry at the Bishop's palace,
And, ten to one, you'll meet him in the Tower.

EDWARD:
'Tis even so; yet you are Warwick still.

GLOUCESTER:
Come, Warwick, take the time; kneel down, kneel down:
Nay, when? strike now, or else the iron cools.

WARWICK:
I had rather chop this hand off at a blow,
And with the other fling it at thy face,
Than bear so low a sail, to strike to thee.

KING EDWARD IV:
Sail how thou canst, have wind and tide thy friend,
This hand, fast wound about thy coal-black hair
Shall, whiles thy head is warm and new cut off,
Write in the dust this sentence with thy blood,
'Wind-changing Warwick now can change no more.'

WARWICK:
O cheerful colours! see where Oxford comes!

OXFORD:
Oxford, Oxford, for Lancaster!

GLOUCESTER:
The gates are open, let us enter too.

KING EDWARD IV:
So other foes may set upon our backs.
Stand we in good array; for they no doubt
Will issue out again and bid us battle:
If not, the city being but of small defence,
We'll quickly rouse the traitors in the same.

WARWICK:
O, welcome, Oxford! for we want thy help.

MONTAGUE:
Montague, Montague, for Lancaster!

GLOUCESTER:
Thou and thy brother both shall buy this treason
Even with the dearest blood your bodies bear.

KING EDWARD IV:
The harder match'd, the greater victory:
My mind presageth happy gain and conquest.

SOMERSET:
Somerset, Somerset, for Lancaster!

GLOUCESTER:
Two of thy name, both Dukes of Somerset,
Have sold their lives unto the house of York;
And thou shalt be the third if this sword hold.

WARWICK:
And lo, where George of Clarence sweeps along,
Of force enough to bid his brother battle;
With whom an upright zeal to right prevails
More than the nature of a brother's love!
Come, Clarence, come; thou wilt, if Warwick call.

CLARENCE:
Father of Warwick, know you what this means?
Look here, I throw my infamy at thee
I will not ruinate my father's house,
Who gave his blood to lime the stones together,
And set up Lancaster. Why, trow'st thou, Warwick,
That Clarence is so harsh, so blunt, unnatural,
To bend the fatal instruments of war
Against his brother and his lawful king?
Perhaps thou wilt object my holy oath:
To keep that oath were more impiety
Than Jephthah's, when he sacrificed his daughter.
I am so sorry for my trespass made
That, to deserve well at my brother's hands,
I here proclaim myself thy mortal foe,
With resolution, wheresoe'er I meet thee--
As I will meet thee, if thou stir abroad--
To plague thee for thy foul misleading me.
And so, proud-hearted Warwick, I defy thee,
And to my brother turn my blushing cheeks.
Pardon me, Edward, I will make amends:
And, Richard, do not frown upon my faults,
For I will henceforth be no more unconstant.

KING EDWARD IV:
Now welcome more, and ten times more beloved,
Than if thou never hadst deserved our hate.

GLOUCESTER:
Welcome, good Clarence; this is brotherlike.

WARWICK:
O passing traitor, perjured and unjust!

KING EDWARD IV:
What, Warwick, wilt thou leave the town and fight?
Or shall we beat the stones about thine ears?

WARWICK:
Alas, I am not coop'd here for defence!
I will away towards Barnet presently,
And bid thee battle, Edward, if thou darest.

KING EDWARD IV:
Yes, Warwick, Edward dares, and leads the way.
Lords, to the field; Saint George and victory!
3 KING HENRY VI

KING EDWARD IV:
So, lie thou there: die thou, and die our fear;
For Warwick was a bug that fear'd us all.
Now, Montague, sit fast; I seek for thee,
That Warwick's bones may keep thine company.

WARWICK:
Ah, who is nigh? come to me, friend or foe,
And tell me who is victor, York or Warwick?
Why ask I that? my mangled body shows,
My blood, my want of strength, my sick heart shows.
That I must yield my body to the earth
And, by my fall, the conquest to my foe.
Thus yields the cedar to the axe's edge,
Whose arms gave shelter to the princely eagle,
Under whose shade the ramping lion slept,
Whose top-branch overpeer'd Jove's spreading tree
And kept low shrubs from winter's powerful wind.
These eyes, that now are dimm'd with death's black veil,
Have been as piercing as the mid-day sun,
To search the secret treasons of the world:
The wrinkles in my brows, now filled with blood,
Were liken'd oft to kingly sepulchres;
For who lived king, but I could dig his grave?
And who durst mine when Warwick bent his brow?
Lo, now my glory smear'd in dust and blood!
My parks, my walks, my manors that I had.
Even now forsake me, and of all my lands
Is nothing left me but my body's length.
Why, what is pomp, rule, reign, but earth and dust?
And, live we how we can, yet die we must.

SOMERSET:
Ah, Warwick, Warwick! wert thou as we are.
We might recover all our loss again;
The queen from France hath brought a puissant power:
Even now we heard the news: ah, could'st thou fly!

WARWICK:
Why, then I would not fly. Ah, Montague,
If thou be there, sweet brother, take my hand.
And with thy lips keep in my soul awhile!
Thou lovest me not; for, brother, if thou didst,
Thy tears would wash this cold congealed blood
That glues my lips and will not let me speak.
Come quickly, Montague, or I am dead.

SOMERSET:
Ah, Warwick! Montague hath breathed his last;
And to the latest gasp cried out for Warwick,
And said 'Commend me to my valiant brother.'
And more he would have said, and more he spoke,
Which sounded like a clamour in a vault,
That mought not be distinguished; but at last
I well might hear, delivered with a groan,
'O, farewell, Warwick!'

WARWICK:
Sweet rest his soul! Fly, lords, and save yourselves;
For Warwick bids you all farewell to meet in heaven.

OXFORD:
Away, away, to meet the queen's great power!
3 KING HENRY VI

KING EDWARD IV:
Thus far our fortune keeps an upward course,
And we are graced with wreaths of victory.
But, in the midst of this bright-shining day,
I spy a black, suspicious, threatening cloud,
That will encounter with our glorious sun,
Ere he attain his easeful western bed:
I mean, my lords, those powers that the queen
Hath raised in Gallia have arrived our coast
And, as we hear, march on to fight with us.

CLARENCE:
A little gale will soon disperse that cloud
And blow it to the source from whence it came:
The very beams will dry those vapours up,
For every cloud engenders not a storm.

GLOUCESTER:
The queen is valued thirty thousand strong,
And Somerset, with Oxford fled to her:
If she have time to breathe be well assured
Her faction will be full as strong as ours.

KING EDWARD IV:
We are advertised by our loving friends
That they do hold their course toward Tewksbury:
We, having now the best at Barnet field,
Will thither straight, for willingness rids way;
And, as we march, our strength will be augmented
In every county as we go along.
Strike up the drum; cry 'Courage!' and away.
3 KING HENRY VI

QUEEN MARGARET:
Great lords, wise men ne'er sit and wail their loss,
But cheerly seek how to redress their harms.
What though the mast be now blown overboard,
The cable broke, the holding-anchor lost,
And half our sailors swallow'd in the flood?
Yet lives our pilot still. Is't meet that he
Should leave the helm and like a fearful lad
With tearful eyes add water to the sea
And give more strength to that which hath too much,
Whiles, in his moan, the ship splits on the rock,
Which industry and courage might have saved?
Ah, what a shame! ah, what a fault were this!
Say Warwick was our anchor; what of that?
And Montague our topmost; what of him?
Our slaughter'd friends the tackles; what of these?
Why, is not Oxford here another anchor?
And Somerset another goodly mast?
The friends of France our shrouds and tacklings?
And, though unskilful, why not Ned and I
For once allow'd the skilful pilot's charge?
We will not from the helm to sit and weep,
But keep our course, though the rough wind say no,
From shelves and rocks that threaten us with wreck.
As good to chide the waves as speak them fair.
And what is Edward but ruthless sea?
What Clarence but a quicksand of deceit?
And Richard but a ragged fatal rock?
All these the enemies to our poor bark.
Say you can swim; alas, 'tis but a while!
Tread on the sand; why, there you quickly sink:
Bestride the rock; the tide will wash you off,
Or else you famish; that's a threefold death.
This speak I, lords, to let you understand,
If case some one of you would fly from us,
That there's no hoped-for mercy with the brothers
More than with ruthless waves, with sands and rocks.
Why, courage then! what cannot be avoided
'Twere childish weakness to lament or fear.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Methinks a woman of this valiant spirit
Should, if a coward heard her speak these words,
Infuse his breast with magnanimity
And make him, naked, foil a man at arms.
I speak not this as doubting any here
For did I but suspect a fearful man
He should have leave to go away betimes,
Lest in our need he might infect another
And make him of like spirit to himself.
If any such be here--as God forbid!--
Let him depart before we need his help.

OXFORD:
Women and children of so high a courage,
And warriors faint! why, 'twere perpetual shame.
O brave young prince! thy famous grandfather
Doth live again in thee: long mayst thou live
To bear his image and renew his glories!

SOMERSET:
And he that will not fight for such a hope.
Go home to bed, and like the owl by day,
If he arise, be mock'd and wonder'd at.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Thanks, gentle Somerset; sweet Oxford, thanks.

PRINCE EDWARD:
And take his thanks that yet hath nothing else.

Messenger:
Prepare you, lords, for Edward is at hand.
Ready to fight; therefore be resolute.

OXFORD:
I thought no less: it is his policy
To haste thus fast, to find us unprovided.

SOMERSET:
But he's deceived; we are in readiness.

QUEEN MARGARET:
This cheers my heart, to see your forwardness.

OXFORD:
Here pitch our battle; hence we will not budge.

KING EDWARD IV:
Brave followers, yonder stands the thorny wood,
Which, by the heavens' assistance and your strength,
Must by the roots be hewn up yet ere night.
I need not add more fuel to your fire,
For well I wot ye blaze to burn them out
Give signal to the fight, and to it, lords!

QUEEN MARGARET:
Lords, knights, and gentlemen, what I should say
My tears gainsay; for every word I speak,
Ye see, I drink the water of mine eyes.
Therefore, no more but this: Henry, your sovereign,
Is prisoner to the foe; his state usurp'd,
His realm a slaughter-house, his subjects slain,
His statutes cancell'd and his treasure spent;
And yonder is the wolf that makes this spoil.
You fight in justice: then, in God's name, lords,
Be valiant and give signal to the fight.
3 KING HENRY VI

KING EDWARD IV:
Now here a period of tumultuous broils.
Away with Oxford to Hames Castle straight:
For Somerset, off with his guilty head.
Go, bear them hence; I will not hear them speak.

OXFORD:
For my part, I'll not trouble thee with words.

SOMERSET:
Nor I, but stoop with patience to my fortune.

QUEEN MARGARET:
So part we sadly in this troublous world,
To meet with joy in sweet Jerusalem.

KING EDWARD IV:
Is proclamation made, that who finds Edward
Shall have a high reward, and he his life?

GLOUCESTER:
It is: and lo, where youthful Edward comes!

KING EDWARD IV:
Bring forth the gallant, let us hear him speak.
What! can so young a thorn begin to prick?
Edward, what satisfaction canst thou make
For bearing arms, for stirring up my subjects,
And all the trouble thou hast turn'd me to?

PRINCE EDWARD:
Speak like a subject, proud ambitious York!
Suppose that I am now my father's mouth;
Resign thy chair, and where I stand kneel thou,
Whilst I propose the selfsame words to thee,
Which traitor, thou wouldst have me answer to.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Ah, that thy father had been so resolved!

GLOUCESTER:
That you might still have worn the petticoat,
And ne'er have stol'n the breech from Lancaster.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Let AEsop fable in a winter's night;
His currish riddles sort not with this place.

GLOUCESTER:
By heaven, brat, I'll plague ye for that word.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Ay, thou wast born to be a plague to men.

GLOUCESTER:
For God's sake, take away this captive scold.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Nay, take away this scolding crookback rather.

KING EDWARD IV:
Peace, wilful boy, or I will charm your tongue.

CLARENCE:
Untutor'd lad, thou art too malapert.

PRINCE EDWARD:
I know my duty; you are all undutiful:
Lascivious Edward, and thou perjured George,
And thou mis-shapen Dick, I tell ye all
I am your better, traitors as ye are:
And thou usurp'st my father's right and mine.

KING EDWARD IV:
Take that, thou likeness of this railer here.

GLOUCESTER:
Sprawl'st thou? take that, to end thy agony.

CLARENCE:
And there's for twitting me with perjury.

QUEEN MARGARET:
O, kill me too!

GLOUCESTER:
Marry, and shall.

KING EDWARD IV:
Hold, Richard, hold; for we have done too much.

GLOUCESTER:
Why should she live, to fill the world with words?

KING EDWARD IV:
What, doth she swoon? use means for her recovery.

GLOUCESTER:
Clarence, excuse me to the king my brother;
I'll hence to London on a serious matter:
Ere ye come there, be sure to hear some news.

CLARENCE:
What? what?

GLOUCESTER:
The Tower, the Tower.

QUEEN MARGARET:
O Ned, sweet Ned! speak to thy mother, boy!
Canst thou not speak? O traitors! murderers!
They that stabb'd Caesar shed no blood at all,
Did not offend, nor were not worthy blame,
If this foul deed were by to equal it:
He was a man; this, in respect, a child:
And men ne'er spend their fury on a child.
What's worse than murderer, that I may name it?
No, no, my heart will burst, and if I speak:
And I will speak, that so my heart may burst.
Butchers and villains! bloody cannibals!
How sweet a plant have you untimely cropp'd!
You have no children, butchers! if you had,
The thought of them would have stirr'd up remorse:
But if you ever chance to have a child,
Look in his youth to have him so cut off
As, deathmen, you have rid this sweet young prince!

KING EDWARD IV:
Away with her; go, bear her hence perforce.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Nay, never bear me hence, dispatch me here,
Here sheathe thy sword, I'll pardon thee my death:
What, wilt thou not? then, Clarence, do it thou.

CLARENCE:
By heaven, I will not do thee so much ease.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Good Clarence, do; sweet Clarence, do thou do it.

CLARENCE:
Didst thou not hear me swear I would not do it?

QUEEN MARGARET:
Ay, but thou usest to forswear thyself:
'Twas sin before, but now 'tis charity.
What, wilt thou not? Where is that devil's butcher,
Hard-favour'd Richard? Richard, where art thou?
Thou art not here: murder is thy alms-deed;
Petitioners for blood thou ne'er put'st back.

KING EDWARD IV:
Away, I say; I charge ye, bear her hence.

QUEEN MARGARET:
So come to you and yours, as to this Prince!

KING EDWARD IV:
Where's Richard gone?

CLARENCE:
To London, all in post; and, as I guess,
To make a bloody supper in the Tower.

KING EDWARD IV:
He's sudden, if a thing comes in his head.
Now march we hence: discharge the common sort
With pay and thanks, and let's away to London
And see our gentle queen how well she fares:
By this, I hope, she hath a son for me.
3 KING HENRY VI

GLOUCESTER:
Good day, my lord. What, at your book so hard?

KING HENRY VI:
Ay, my good lord:--my lord, I should say rather;
'Tis sin to flatter; 'good' was little better:
'Good Gloucester' and 'good devil' were alike,
And both preposterous; therefore, not 'good lord.'

GLOUCESTER:
Sirrah, leave us to ourselves: we must confer.

KING HENRY VI:
So flies the reckless shepherd from the wolf;
So first the harmless sheep doth yield his fleece
And next his throat unto the butcher's knife.
What scene of death hath Roscius now to act?

GLOUCESTER:
Suspicion always haunts the guilty mind;
The thief doth fear each bush an officer.

KING HENRY VI:
The bird that hath been limed in a bush,
With trembling wings misdoubteth every bush;
And I, the hapless male to one sweet bird,
Have now the fatal object in my eye
Where my poor young was limed, was caught and kill'd.

GLOUCESTER:
Why, what a peevish fool was that of Crete,
That taught his son the office of a fowl!
An yet, for all his wings, the fool was drown'd.

KING HENRY VI:
I, Daedalus; my poor boy, Icarus;
Thy father, Minos, that denied our course;
The sun that sear'd the wings of my sweet boy
Thy brother Edward, and thyself the sea
Whose envious gulf did swallow up his life.
Ah, kill me with thy weapon, not with words!
My breast can better brook thy dagger's point
Than can my ears that tragic history.
But wherefore dost thou come? is't for my life?

GLOUCESTER:
Think'st thou I am an executioner?

KING HENRY VI:
A persecutor, I am sure, thou art:
If murdering innocents be executing,
Why, then thou art an executioner.

GLOUCESTER:
Thy son I kill'd for his presumption.

KING HENRY VI:
Hadst thou been kill'd when first thou didst presume,
Thou hadst not lived to kill a son of mine.
And thus I prophesy, that many a thousand,
Which now mistrust no parcel of my fear,
And many an old man's sigh and many a widow's,
And many an orphan's water-standing eye--
Men for their sons, wives for their husbands,
And orphans for their parents timeless death--
Shall rue the hour that ever thou wast born.
The owl shriek'd at thy birth,--an evil sign;
The night-crow cried, aboding luckless time;
Dogs howl'd, and hideous tempest shook down trees;
The raven rook'd her on the chimney's top,
And chattering pies in dismal discords sung.
Thy mother felt more than a mother's pain,
And, yet brought forth less than a mother's hope,
To wit, an indigested and deformed lump,
Not like the fruit of such a goodly tree.
Teeth hadst thou in thy head when thou wast born,
To signify thou camest to bite the world:
And, if the rest be true which I have heard,
Thou camest--

GLOUCESTER:
I'll hear no more: die, prophet in thy speech:
For this amongst the rest, was I ordain'd.

KING HENRY VI:
Ay, and for much more slaughter after this.
God forgive my sins, and pardon thee!

GLOUCESTER:
What, will the aspiring blood of Lancaster
Sink in the ground? I thought it would have mounted.
See how my sword weeps for the poor king's death!
O, may such purple tears be alway shed
From those that wish the downfall of our house!
If any spark of life be yet remaining,
Down, down to hell; and say I sent thee thither:
I, that have neither pity, love, nor fear.
Indeed, 'tis true that Henry told me of;
For I have often heard my mother say
I came into the world with my legs forward:
Had I not reason, think ye, to make haste,
And seek their ruin that usurp'd our right?
The midwife wonder'd and the women cried
'O, Jesus bless us, he is born with teeth!'
And so I was; which plainly signified
That I should snarl and bite and play the dog.
Then, since the heavens have shaped my body so,
Let hell make crook'd my mind to answer it.
I have no brother, I am like no brother;
And this word 'love,' which graybeards call divine,
Be resident in men like one another
And not in me: I am myself alone.
Clarence, beware; thou keep'st me from the light:
But I will sort a pitchy day for thee;
For I will buz abroad such prophecies
That Edward shall be fearful of his life,
And then, to purge his fear, I'll be thy death.
King Henry and the prince his son are gone:
Clarence, thy turn is next, and then the rest,
Counting myself but bad till I be best.
I'll throw thy body in another room
And triumph, Henry, in thy day of doom.
3 KING HENRY VI

KING EDWARD IV:
Once more we sit in England's royal throne,
Re-purchased with the blood of enemies.
What valiant foemen, like to autumn's corn,
Have we mow'd down, in tops of all their pride!
Three Dukes of Somerset, threefold renown'd
For hardy and undoubted champions;
Two Cliffords, as the father and the son,
And two Northumberlands; two braver men
Ne'er spurr'd their coursers at the trumpet's sound;
With them, the two brave bears, Warwick and Montague,
That in their chains fetter'd the kingly lion
And made the forest tremble when they roar'd.
Thus have we swept suspicion from our seat
And made our footstool of security.
Come hither, Bess, and let me kiss my boy.
Young Ned, for thee, thine uncles and myself
Have in our armours watch'd the winter's night,
Went all afoot in summer's scalding heat,
That thou mightst repossess the crown in peace;
And of our labours thou shalt reap the gain.

GLOUCESTER:

KING EDWARD IV:
Clarence and Gloucester, love my lovely queen;
And kiss your princely nephew, brothers both.

CLARENCE:
The duty that I owe unto your majesty
I seal upon the lips of this sweet babe.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Thanks, noble Clarence; worthy brother, thanks.

GLOUCESTER:
And, that I love the tree from whence thou sprang'st,
Witness the loving kiss I give the fruit.

KING EDWARD IV:
Now am I seated as my soul delights,
Having my country's peace and brothers' loves.

CLARENCE:
What will your grace have done with Margaret?
Reignier, her father, to the king of France
Hath pawn'd the Sicils and Jerusalem,
And hither have they sent it for her ransom.

KING EDWARD IV:
Away with her, and waft her hence to France.
And now what rests but that we spend the time
With stately triumphs, mirthful comic shows,
Such as befits the pleasure of the court?
Sound drums and trumpets! farewell sour annoy!
For here, I hope, begins our lasting joy.

ARCHIDAMUS:
If you shall chance, Camillo, to visit Bohemia, on
the like occasion whereon my services are now on
foot, you shall see, as I have said, great
difference betwixt our Bohemia and your Sicilia.

CAMILLO:
I think, this coming summer, the King of Sicilia
means to pay Bohemia the visitation which he justly owes him.

ARCHIDAMUS:
Wherein our entertainment shall shame us we will be
justified in our loves; for indeed--

CAMILLO:
Beseech you,--

ARCHIDAMUS:
Verily, I speak it in the freedom of my knowledge:
we cannot with such magnificence--in so rare--I know
not what to say. We will give you sleepy drinks,
that your senses, unintelligent of our insufficience,
may, though they cannot praise us, as little accuse
us.

CAMILLO:
You pay a great deal too dear for what's given freely.

ARCHIDAMUS:
Believe me, I speak as my understanding instructs me
and as mine honesty puts it to utterance.

CAMILLO:
Sicilia cannot show himself over-kind to Bohemia.
They were trained together in their childhoods; and
there rooted betwixt them then such an affection,
which cannot choose but branch now. Since their
more mature dignities and royal necessities made
separation of their society, their encounters,
though not personal, have been royally attorneyed
with interchange of gifts, letters, loving
embassies; that they have seemed to be together,
though absent, shook hands, as over a vast, and
embraced, as it were, from the ends of opposed
winds. The heavens continue their loves!

ARCHIDAMUS:
I think there is not in the world either malice or
matter to alter it. You have an unspeakable
comfort of your young prince Mamillius: it is a
gentleman of the greatest promise that ever came
into my note.

CAMILLO:
I very well agree with you in the hopes of him: it
is a gallant child; one that indeed physics the
subject, makes old hearts fresh: they that went on
crutches ere he was born desire yet their life to
see him a man.

ARCHIDAMUS:
Would they else be content to die?

CAMILLO:
Yes; if there were no other excuse why they should
desire to live.

ARCHIDAMUS:
If the king had no son, they would desire to live
on crutches till he had one.

POLIXENES:
Nine changes of the watery star hath been
The shepherd's note since we have left our throne
Without a burthen: time as long again
Would be find up, my brother, with our thanks;
And yet we should, for perpetuity,
Go hence in debt: and therefore, like a cipher,
Yet standing in rich place, I multiply
With one 'We thank you' many thousands moe
That go before it.

LEONTES:
Stay your thanks a while;
And pay them when you part.

POLIXENES:
Sir, that's to-morrow.
I am question'd by my fears, of what may chance
Or breed upon our absence; that may blow
No sneaping winds at home, to make us say
'This is put forth too truly:' besides, I have stay'd
To tire your royalty.

LEONTES:
We are tougher, brother,
Than you can put us to't.

POLIXENES:
No longer stay.

LEONTES:
One seven-night longer.

POLIXENES:
Very sooth, to-morrow.

LEONTES:
We'll part the time between's then; and in that
I'll no gainsaying.

POLIXENES:
Press me not, beseech you, so.
There is no tongue that moves, none, none i' the world,
So soon as yours could win me: so it should now,
Were there necessity in your request, although
'Twere needful I denied it. My affairs
Do even drag me homeward: which to hinder
Were in your love a whip to me; my stay
To you a charge and trouble: to save both,
Farewell, our brother.

LEONTES:
Tongue-tied, our queen?
speak you.

HERMIONE:
I had thought, sir, to have held my peace until
You have drawn oaths from him not to stay. You, sir,
Charge him too coldly. Tell him, you are sure
All in Bohemia's well; this satisfaction
The by-gone day proclaim'd: say this to him,
He's beat from his best ward.

LEONTES:
Well said, Hermione.

HERMIONE:
To tell, he longs to see his son, were strong:
But let him say so then, and let him go;
But let him swear so, and he shall not stay,
We'll thwack him hence with distaffs.
Yet of your royal presence I'll adventure
The borrow of a week. When at Bohemia
You take my lord, I'll give him my commission
To let him there a month behind the gest
Prefix'd for's parting: yet, good deed, Leontes,
I love thee not a jar o' the clock behind
What lady-she her lord. You'll stay?

POLIXENES:
No, madam.

HERMIONE:
Nay, but you will?

POLIXENES:
I may not, verily.

HERMIONE:
Verily!
You put me off with limber vows; but I,
Though you would seek to unsphere the
stars with oaths,
Should yet say 'Sir, no going.' Verily,
You shall not go: a lady's 'Verily' 's
As potent as a lord's. Will you go yet?
Force me to keep you as a prisoner,
Not like a guest; so you shall pay your fees
When you depart, and save your thanks. How say you?
My prisoner? or my guest? by your dread 'Verily,'
One of them you shall be.

POLIXENES:
Your guest, then, madam:
To be your prisoner should import offending;
Which is for me less easy to commit
Than you to punish.

HERMIONE:
Not your gaoler, then,
But your kind hostess. Come, I'll question you
Of my lord's tricks and yours when you were boys:
You were pretty lordings then?

POLIXENES:
We were, fair queen,
Two lads that thought there was no more behind
But such a day to-morrow as to-day,
And to be boy eternal.

HERMIONE:
Was not my lord
The verier wag o' the two?

POLIXENES:
We were as twinn'd lambs that did frisk i' the sun,
And bleat the one at the other: what we changed
Was innocence for innocence; we knew not
The doctrine of ill-doing, nor dream'd
That any did. Had we pursued that life,
And our weak spirits ne'er been higher rear'd
With stronger blood, we should have answer'd heaven
Boldly 'not guilty;' the imposition clear'd
Hereditary ours.

HERMIONE:
By this we gather
You have tripp'd since.

POLIXENES:
O my most sacred lady!
Temptations have since then been born to's; for
In those unfledged days was my wife a girl;
Your precious self had then not cross'd the eyes
Of my young play-fellow.

HERMIONE:
Grace to boot!
Of this make no conclusion, lest you say
Your queen and I are devils: yet go on;
The offences we have made you do we'll answer,
If you first sinn'd with us and that with us
You did continue fault and that you slipp'd not
With any but with us.

LEONTES:
Is he won yet?

HERMIONE:
He'll stay my lord.

LEONTES:
At my request he would not.
Hermione, my dearest, thou never spokest
To better purpose.

HERMIONE:
Never?

LEONTES:
Never, but once.

HERMIONE:
What! have I twice said well? when was't before?
I prithee tell me; cram's with praise, and make's
As fat as tame things: one good deed dying tongueless
Slaughters a thousand waiting upon that.
Our praises are our wages: you may ride's
With one soft kiss a thousand furlongs ere
With spur we beat an acre. But to the goal:
My last good deed was to entreat his stay:
What was my first? it has an elder sister,
Or I mistake you: O, would her name were Grace!
But once before I spoke to the purpose: when?
Nay, let me have't; I long.

LEONTES:
Why, that was when
Three crabbed months had sour'd themselves to death,
Ere I could make thee open thy white hand
And clap thyself my love: then didst thou utter
'I am yours for ever.'

HERMIONE:
'Tis grace indeed.
Why, lo you now, I have spoke to the purpose twice:
The one for ever earn'd a royal husband;
The other for some while a friend.

LEONTES:

MAMILLIUS:
Ay, my good lord.

LEONTES:
I' fecks!
Why, that's my bawcock. What, hast
smutch'd thy nose?
They say it is a copy out of mine. Come, captain,
We must be neat; not neat, but cleanly, captain:
And yet the steer, the heifer and the calf
Are all call'd neat.--Still virginalling
Upon his palm!--How now, you wanton calf!
Art thou my calf?

MAMILLIUS:
Yes, if you will, my lord.

LEONTES:
Thou want'st a rough pash and the shoots that I have,
To be full like me: yet they say we are
Almost as like as eggs; women say so,
That will say anything but were they false
As o'er-dyed blacks, as wind, as waters, false
As dice are to be wish'd by one that fixes
No bourn 'twixt his and mine, yet were it true
To say this boy were like me. Come, sir page,
Look on me with your welkin eye: sweet villain!
Most dear'st! my collop! Can thy dam?--may't be?--
Affection! thy intention stabs the centre:
Thou dost make possible things not so held,
Communicatest with dreams;--how can this be?--
With what's unreal thou coactive art,
And fellow'st nothing: then 'tis very credent
Thou mayst co-join with something; and thou dost,
And that beyond commission, and I find it,
And that to the infection of my brains
And hardening of my brows.

POLIXENES:
What means Sicilia?

HERMIONE:
He something seems unsettled.

POLIXENES:
How, my lord!
What cheer? how is't with you, best brother?

HERMIONE:
You look as if you held a brow of much distraction
Are you moved, my lord?

LEONTES:
No, in good earnest.
How sometimes nature will betray its folly,
Its tenderness, and make itself a pastime
To harder bosoms! Looking on the lines
Of my boy's face, methoughts I did recoil
Twenty-three years, and saw myself unbreech'd,
In my green velvet coat, my dagger muzzled,
Lest it should bite its master, and so prove,
As ornaments oft do, too dangerous:
How like, methought, I then was to this kernel,
This squash, this gentleman. Mine honest friend,
Will you take eggs for money?

MAMILLIUS:
No, my lord, I'll fight.

LEONTES:
You will! why, happy man be's dole! My brother,
Are you so fond of your young prince as we
Do seem to be of ours?

POLIXENES:
If at home, sir,
He's all my exercise, my mirth, my matter,
Now my sworn friend and then mine enemy,
My parasite, my soldier, statesman, all:
He makes a July's day short as December,
And with his varying childness cures in me
Thoughts that would thick my blood.

LEONTES:
So stands this squire
Officed with me: we two will walk, my lord,
And leave you to your graver steps. Hermione,
How thou lovest us, show in our brother's welcome;
Let what is dear in Sicily be cheap:
Next to thyself and my young rover, he's
Apparent to my heart.

HERMIONE:
If you would seek us,
We are yours i' the garden: shall's attend you there?

LEONTES:
To your own bents dispose you: you'll be found,
Be you beneath the sky.
I am angling now,
Though you perceive me not how I give line.
Go to, go to!
How she holds up the neb, the bill to him!
And arms her with the boldness of a wife
To her allowing husband!
Gone already!
Inch-thick, knee-deep, o'er head and
ears a fork'd one!
Go, play, boy, play: thy mother plays, and I
Play too, but so disgraced a part, whose issue
Will hiss me to my grave: contempt and clamour
Will be my knell. Go, play, boy, play.
There have been,
Or I am much deceived, cuckolds ere now;
And many a man there is, even at this present,
Now while I speak this, holds his wife by the arm,
That little thinks she has been sluiced in's absence
And his pond fish'd by his next neighbour, by
Sir Smile, his neighbour: nay, there's comfort in't
Whiles other men have gates and those gates open'd,
As mine, against their will. Should all despair
That have revolted wives, the tenth of mankind
Would hang themselves. Physic for't there is none;
It is a bawdy planet, that will strike
Where 'tis predominant; and 'tis powerful, think it,
From east, west, north and south: be it concluded,
No barricado for a belly; know't;
It will let in and out the enemy
With bag and baggage: many thousand on's
Have the disease, and feel't not. How now, boy!

MAMILLIUS:
I am like you, they say.

LEONTES:
Why that's some comfort. What, Camillo there?

CAMILLO:
Ay, my good lord.

LEONTES:
Go play, Mamillius; thou'rt an honest man.
Camillo, this great sir will yet stay longer.

CAMILLO:
You had much ado to make his anchor hold:
When you cast out, it still came home.

LEONTES:
Didst note it?

CAMILLO:
He would not stay at your petitions: made
His business more material.

LEONTES:
Didst perceive it?
They're here with me already, whispering, rounding
'Sicilia is a so-forth:' 'tis far gone,
When I shall gust it last. How came't, Camillo,
That he did stay?

CAMILLO:
At the good queen's entreaty.

LEONTES:
At the queen's be't: 'good' should be pertinent
But, so it is, it is not. Was this taken
By any understanding pate but thine?
For thy conceit is soaking, will draw in
More than the common blocks: not noted, is't,
But of the finer natures? by some severals
Of head-piece extraordinary? lower messes
Perchance are to this business purblind? say.

CAMILLO:
Business, my lord! I think most understand
Bohemia stays here longer.

LEONTES:
Ha!

CAMILLO:
Stays here longer.

LEONTES:
Ay, but why?

CAMILLO:
To satisfy your highness and the entreaties
Of our most gracious mistress.

LEONTES:
Satisfy!
The entreaties of your mistress! satisfy!
Let that suffice. I have trusted thee, Camillo,
With all the nearest things to my heart, as well
My chamber-councils, wherein, priest-like, thou
Hast cleansed my bosom, I from thee departed
Thy penitent reform'd: but we have been
Deceived in thy integrity, deceived
In that which seems so.

CAMILLO:
Be it forbid, my lord!

LEONTES:
To bide upon't, thou art not honest, or,
If thou inclinest that way, thou art a coward,
Which hoxes honesty behind, restraining
From course required; or else thou must be counted
A servant grafted in my serious trust
And therein negligent; or else a fool
That seest a game play'd home, the rich stake drawn,
And takest it all for jest.

CAMILLO:
My gracious lord,
I may be negligent, foolish and fearful;
In every one of these no man is free,
But that his negligence, his folly, fear,
Among the infinite doings of the world,
Sometime puts forth. In your affairs, my lord,
If ever I were wilful-negligent,
It was my folly; if industriously
I play'd the fool, it was my negligence,
Not weighing well the end; if ever fearful
To do a thing, where I the issue doubted,
Where of the execution did cry out
Against the non-performance, 'twas a fear
Which oft infects the wisest: these, my lord,
Are such allow'd infirmities that honesty
Is never free of. But, beseech your grace,
Be plainer with me; let me know my trespass
By its own visage: if I then deny it,
'Tis none of mine.

LEONTES:
Ha' not you seen, Camillo,--
But that's past doubt, you have, or your eye-glass
Is thicker than a cuckold's horn,--or heard,--
For to a vision so apparent rumour
Cannot be mute,--or thought,--for cogitation
Resides not in that man that does not think,--
My wife is slippery? If thou wilt confess,
Or else be impudently negative,
To have nor eyes nor ears nor thought, then say
My wife's a hobby-horse, deserves a name
As rank as any flax-wench that puts to
Before her troth-plight: say't and justify't.

CAMILLO:
I would not be a stander-by to hear
My sovereign mistress clouded so, without
My present vengeance taken: 'shrew my heart,
You never spoke what did become you less
Than this; which to reiterate were sin
As deep as that, though true.

LEONTES:
Is whispering nothing?
Is leaning cheek to cheek? is meeting noses?
Kissing with inside lip? stopping the career
Of laughing with a sigh?--a note infallible
Of breaking honesty--horsing foot on foot?
Skulking in corners? wishing clocks more swift?
Hours, minutes? noon, midnight? and all eyes
Blind with the pin and web but theirs, theirs only,
That would unseen be wicked? is this nothing?
Why, then the world and all that's in't is nothing;
The covering sky is nothing; Bohemia nothing;
My wife is nothing; nor nothing have these nothings,
If this be nothing.

CAMILLO:
Good my lord, be cured
Of this diseased opinion, and betimes;
For 'tis most dangerous.

LEONTES:
Say it be, 'tis true.

CAMILLO:
No, no, my lord.

LEONTES:
It is; you lie, you lie:
I say thou liest, Camillo, and I hate thee,
Pronounce thee a gross lout, a mindless slave,
Or else a hovering temporizer, that
Canst with thine eyes at once see good and evil,
Inclining to them both: were my wife's liver
Infected as her life, she would not live
The running of one glass.

CAMILLO:
Who does infect her?

LEONTES:
Why, he that wears her like a medal, hanging
About his neck, Bohemia: who, if I
Had servants true about me, that bare eyes
To see alike mine honour as their profits,
Their own particular thrifts, they would do that
Which should undo more doing: ay, and thou,
His cupbearer,--whom I from meaner form
Have benched and reared to worship, who mayst see
Plainly as heaven sees earth and earth sees heaven,
How I am galled,--mightst bespice a cup,
To give mine enemy a lasting wink;
Which draught to me were cordial.

CAMILLO:
Sir, my lord,
I could do this, and that with no rash potion,
But with a lingering dram that should not work
Maliciously like poison: but I cannot
Believe this crack to be in my dread mistress,
So sovereignly being honourable.
I have loved thee,--

LEONTES:
Make that thy question, and go rot!
Dost think I am so muddy, so unsettled,
To appoint myself in this vexation, sully
The purity and whiteness of my sheets,
Which to preserve is sleep, which being spotted
Is goads, thorns, nettles, tails of wasps,
Give scandal to the blood o' the prince my son,
Who I do think is mine and love as mine,
Without ripe moving to't? Would I do this?
Could man so blench?

CAMILLO:
I must believe you, sir:
I do; and will fetch off Bohemia for't;
Provided that, when he's removed, your highness
Will take again your queen as yours at first,
Even for your son's sake; and thereby for sealing
The injury of tongues in courts and kingdoms
Known and allied to yours.

LEONTES:
Thou dost advise me
Even so as I mine own course have set down:
I'll give no blemish to her honour, none.

CAMILLO:
My lord,
Go then; and with a countenance as clear
As friendship wears at feasts, keep with Bohemia
And with your queen. I am his cupbearer:
If from me he have wholesome beverage,
Account me not your servant.

LEONTES:
This is all:
Do't and thou hast the one half of my heart;
Do't not, thou split'st thine own.

CAMILLO:
I'll do't, my lord.

LEONTES:
I will seem friendly, as thou hast advised me.

CAMILLO:
O miserable lady! But, for me,
What case stand I in? I must be the poisoner
Of good Polixenes; and my ground to do't
Is the obedience to a master, one
Who in rebellion with himself will have
All that are his so too. To do this deed,
Promotion follows. If I could find example
Of thousands that had struck anointed kings
And flourish'd after, I'ld not do't; but since
Nor brass nor stone nor parchment bears not one,
Let villany itself forswear't. I must
Forsake the court: to do't, or no, is certain
To me a break-neck. Happy star, reign now!
Here comes Bohemia.

POLIXENES:
This is strange: methinks
My favour here begins to warp. Not speak?
Good day, Camillo.

CAMILLO:
Hail, most royal sir!

POLIXENES:
What is the news i' the court?

CAMILLO:
None rare, my lord.

POLIXENES:
The king hath on him such a countenance
As he had lost some province and a region
Loved as he loves himself: even now I met him
With customary compliment; when he,
Wafting his eyes to the contrary and falling
A lip of much contempt, speeds from me and
So leaves me to consider what is breeding
That changeth thus his manners.

CAMILLO:
I dare not know, my lord.

POLIXENES:
How! dare not! do not. Do you know, and dare not?
Be intelligent to me: 'tis thereabouts;
For, to yourself, what you do know, you must.
And cannot say, you dare not. Good Camillo,
Your changed complexions are to me a mirror
Which shows me mine changed too; for I must be
A party in this alteration, finding
Myself thus alter'd with 't.

CAMILLO:
There is a sickness
Which puts some of us in distemper, but
I cannot name the disease; and it is caught
Of you that yet are well.

POLIXENES:
How! caught of me!
Make me not sighted like the basilisk:
I have look'd on thousands, who have sped the better
By my regard, but kill'd none so. Camillo,--
As you are certainly a gentleman, thereto
Clerk-like experienced, which no less adorns
Our gentry than our parents' noble names,
In whose success we are gentle,--I beseech you,
If you know aught which does behove my knowledge
Thereof to be inform'd, imprison't not
In ignorant concealment.

CAMILLO:
I may not answer.

POLIXENES:
A sickness caught of me, and yet I well!
I must be answer'd. Dost thou hear, Camillo,
I conjure thee, by all the parts of man
Which honour does acknowledge, whereof the least
Is not this suit of mine, that thou declare
What incidency thou dost guess of harm
Is creeping toward me; how far off, how near;
Which way to be prevented, if to be;
If not, how best to bear it.

CAMILLO:
Sir, I will tell you;
Since I am charged in honour and by him
That I think honourable: therefore mark my counsel,
Which must be even as swiftly follow'd as
I mean to utter it, or both yourself and me
Cry lost, and so good night!

POLIXENES:
On, good Camillo.

CAMILLO:
I am appointed him to murder you.

POLIXENES:
By whom, Camillo?

CAMILLO:
By the king.

POLIXENES:
For what?

CAMILLO:
He thinks, nay, with all confidence he swears,
As he had seen't or been an instrument
To vice you to't, that you have touch'd his queen
Forbiddenly.

POLIXENES:
O, then my best blood turn
To an infected jelly and my name
Be yoked with his that did betray the Best!
Turn then my freshest reputation to
A savour that may strike the dullest nostril
Where I arrive, and my approach be shunn'd,
Nay, hated too, worse than the great'st infection
That e'er was heard or read!

CAMILLO:
Swear his thought over
By each particular star in heaven and
By all their influences, you may as well
Forbid the sea for to obey the moon
As or by oath remove or counsel shake
The fabric of his folly, whose foundation
Is piled upon his faith and will continue
The standing of his body.

POLIXENES:
How should this grow?

CAMILLO:
I know not: but I am sure 'tis safer to
Avoid what's grown than question how 'tis born.
If therefore you dare trust my honesty,
That lies enclosed in this trunk which you
Shall bear along impawn'd, away to-night!
Your followers I will whisper to the business,
And will by twos and threes at several posterns
Clear them o' the city. For myself, I'll put
My fortunes to your service, which are here
By this discovery lost. Be not uncertain;
For, by the honour of my parents, I
Have utter'd truth: which if you seek to prove,
I dare not stand by; nor shall you be safer
Than one condemn'd by the king's own mouth, thereon
His execution sworn.

POLIXENES:
I do believe thee:
I saw his heart in 's face. Give me thy hand:
Be pilot to me and thy places shall
Still neighbour mine. My ships are ready and
My people did expect my hence departure
Two days ago. This jealousy
Is for a precious creature: as she's rare,
Must it be great, and as his person's mighty,
Must it be violent, and as he does conceive
He is dishonour'd by a man which ever
Profess'd to him, why, his revenges must
In that be made more bitter. Fear o'ershades me:
Good expedition be my friend, and comfort
The gracious queen, part of his theme, but nothing
Of his ill-ta'en suspicion! Come, Camillo;
I will respect thee as a father if
Thou bear'st my life off hence: let us avoid.

CAMILLO:
It is in mine authority to command
The keys of all the posterns: please your highness
To take the urgent hour. Come, sir, away.

HERMIONE:
Take the boy to you: he so troubles me,
'Tis past enduring.

First Lady:
Come, my gracious lord,
Shall I be your playfellow?

MAMILLIUS:
No, I'll none of you.

First Lady:
Why, my sweet lord?

MAMILLIUS:
You'll kiss me hard and speak to me as if
I were a baby still. I love you better.

Second Lady:
And why so, my lord?

MAMILLIUS:
Not for because
Your brows are blacker; yet black brows, they say,
Become some women best, so that there be not
Too much hair there, but in a semicircle
Or a half-moon made with a pen.

Second Lady:
Who taught you this?

MAMILLIUS:
I learnt it out of women's faces. Pray now
What colour are your eyebrows?

First Lady:
Blue, my lord.

MAMILLIUS:
Nay, that's a mock: I have seen a lady's nose
That has been blue, but not her eyebrows.

First Lady:
Hark ye;
The queen your mother rounds apace: we shall
Present our services to a fine new prince
One of these days; and then you'ld wanton with us,
If we would have you.

Second Lady:
She is spread of late
Into a goodly bulk: good time encounter her!

HERMIONE:
What wisdom stirs amongst you? Come, sir, now
I am for you again: pray you, sit by us,
And tell 's a tale.

MAMILLIUS:
Merry or sad shall't be?

HERMIONE:
As merry as you will.

MAMILLIUS:
A sad tale's best for winter: I have one
Of sprites and goblins.

HERMIONE:
Let's have that, good sir.
Come on, sit down: come on, and do your best
To fright me with your sprites; you're powerful at it.

MAMILLIUS:
There was a man--

HERMIONE:
Nay, come, sit down; then on.

MAMILLIUS:
Dwelt by a churchyard: I will tell it softly;
Yond crickets shall not hear it.

HERMIONE:
Come on, then,
And give't me in mine ear.

LEONTES:
Was he met there? his train? Camillo with him?

First Lord:
Behind the tuft of pines I met them; never
Saw I men scour so on their way: I eyed them
Even to their ships.

LEONTES:
How blest am I
In my just censure, in my true opinion!
Alack, for lesser knowledge! how accursed
In being so blest! There may be in the cup
A spider steep'd, and one may drink, depart,
And yet partake no venom, for his knowledge
Is not infected: but if one present
The abhorr'd ingredient to his eye, make known
How he hath drunk, he cracks his gorge, his sides,
With violent hefts. I have drunk,
and seen the spider.
Camillo was his help in this, his pander:
There is a plot against my life, my crown;
All's true that is mistrusted: that false villain
Whom I employ'd was pre-employ'd by him:
He has discover'd my design, and I
Remain a pinch'd thing; yea, a very trick
For them to play at will. How came the posterns
So easily open?

First Lord:
By his great authority;
Which often hath no less prevail'd than so
On your command.

LEONTES:
I know't too well.
Give me the boy: I am glad you did not nurse him:
Though he does bear some signs of me, yet you
Have too much blood in him.

HERMIONE:
What is this? sport?

LEONTES:
Bear the boy hence; he shall not come about her;
Away with him! and let her sport herself
With that she's big with; for 'tis Polixenes
Has made thee swell thus.

HERMIONE:
But I'ld say he had not,
And I'll be sworn you would believe my saying,
Howe'er you lean to the nayward.

LEONTES:
You, my lords,
Look on her, mark her well; be but about
To say 'she is a goodly lady,' and
The justice of your bearts will thereto add
'Tis pity she's not honest, honourable:'
Praise her but for this her without-door form,
Which on my faith deserves high speech, and straight
The shrug, the hum or ha, these petty brands
That calumny doth use--O, I am out--
That mercy does, for calumny will sear
Virtue itself: these shrugs, these hums and ha's,
When you have said 'she's goodly,' come between
Ere you can say 'she's honest:' but be 't known,
From him that has most cause to grieve it should be,
She's an adulteress.

HERMIONE:
Should a villain say so,
The most replenish'd villain in the world,
He were as much more villain: you, my lord,
Do but mistake.

LEONTES:
You have mistook, my lady,
Polixenes for Leontes: O thou thing!
Which I'll not call a creature of thy place,
Lest barbarism, making me the precedent,
Should a like language use to all degrees
And mannerly distinguishment leave out
Betwixt the prince and beggar: I have said
She's an adulteress; I have said with whom:
More, she's a traitor and Camillo is
A federary with her, and one that knows
What she should shame to know herself
But with her most vile principal, that she's
A bed-swerver, even as bad as those
That vulgars give bold'st titles, ay, and privy
To this their late escape.

HERMIONE:
No, by my life.
Privy to none of this. How will this grieve you,
When you shall come to clearer knowledge, that
You thus have publish'd me! Gentle my lord,
You scarce can right me throughly then to say
You did mistake.

LEONTES:
No; if I mistake
In those foundations which I build upon,
The centre is not big enough to bear
A school-boy's top. Away with her! to prison!
He who shall speak for her is afar off guilty
But that he speaks.

HERMIONE:
There's some ill planet reigns:
I must be patient till the heavens look
With an aspect more favourable. Good my lords,
I am not prone to weeping, as our sex
Commonly are; the want of which vain dew
Perchance shall dry your pities: but I have
That honourable grief lodged here which burns
Worse than tears drown: beseech you all, my lords,
With thoughts so qualified as your charities
Shall best instruct you, measure me; and so
The king's will be perform'd!

LEONTES:
Shall I be heard?

HERMIONE:
Who is't that goes with me? Beseech your highness,
My women may be with me; for you see
My plight requires it. Do not weep, good fools;
There is no cause: when you shall know your mistress
Has deserved prison, then abound in tears
As I come out: this action I now go on
Is for my better grace. Adieu, my lord:
I never wish'd to see you sorry; now
I trust I shall. My women, come; you have leave.

LEONTES:
Go, do our bidding; hence!

First Lord:
Beseech your highness, call the queen again.

ANTIGONUS:
Be certain what you do, sir, lest your justice
Prove violence; in the which three great ones suffer,
Yourself, your queen, your son.

First Lord:
For her, my lord,
I dare my life lay down and will do't, sir,
Please you to accept it, that the queen is spotless
I' the eyes of heaven and to you; I mean,
In this which you accuse her.

ANTIGONUS:
If it prove
She's otherwise, I'll keep my stables where
I lodge my wife; I'll go in couples with her;
Than when I feel and see her no farther trust her;
For every inch of woman in the world,
Ay, every dram of woman's flesh is false, If she be.

LEONTES:
Hold your peaces.

First Lord:
Good my lord,--

ANTIGONUS:
It is for you we speak, not for ourselves:
You are abused and by some putter-on
That will be damn'd for't; would I knew the villain,
I would land-damn him. Be she honour-flaw'd,
I have three daughters; the eldest is eleven
The second and the third, nine, and some five;
If this prove true, they'll pay for't:
by mine honour,
I'll geld 'em all; fourteen they shall not see,
To bring false generations: they are co-heirs;
And I had rather glib myself than they
Should not produce fair issue.

LEONTES:
Cease; no more.
You smell this business with a sense as cold
As is a dead man's nose: but I do see't and feel't
As you feel doing thus; and see withal
The instruments that feel.

ANTIGONUS:
If it be so,
We need no grave to bury honesty:
There's not a grain of it the face to sweeten
Of the whole dungy earth.

LEONTES:
What! lack I credit?

First Lord:
I had rather you did lack than I, my lord,
Upon this ground; and more it would content me
To have her honour true than your suspicion,
Be blamed for't how you might.

LEONTES:
Why, what need we
Commune with you of this, but rather follow
Our forceful instigation? Our prerogative
Calls not your counsels, but our natural goodness
Imparts this; which if you, or stupefied
Or seeming so in skill, cannot or will not
Relish a truth like us, inform yourselves
We need no more of your advice: the matter,
The loss, the gain, the ordering on't, is all
Properly ours.

ANTIGONUS:
And I wish, my liege,
You had only in your silent judgment tried it,
Without more overture.

LEONTES:
How could that be?
Either thou art most ignorant by age,
Or thou wert born a fool. Camillo's flight,
Added to their familiarity,
Which was as gross as ever touch'd conjecture,
That lack'd sight only, nought for approbation
But only seeing, all other circumstances
Made up to the deed, doth push on this proceeding:
Yet, for a greater confirmation,
For in an act of this importance 'twere
Most piteous to be wild, I have dispatch'd in post
To sacred Delphos, to Apollo's temple,
Cleomenes and Dion, whom you know
Of stuff'd sufficiency: now from the oracle
They will bring all; whose spiritual counsel had,
Shall stop or spur me. Have I done well?

First Lord:
Well done, my lord.

LEONTES:
Though I am satisfied and need no more
Than what I know, yet shall the oracle
Give rest to the minds of others, such as he
Whose ignorant credulity will not


--- End of file: shakespear_13.txt ---

Come up to the truth. So have we thought it good
From our free person she should be confined,
Lest that the treachery of the two fled hence
Be left her to perform. Come, follow us;
We are to speak in public; for this business
Will raise us all.

ANTIGONUS:

PAULINA:
The keeper of the prison, call to him;
let him have knowledge who I am.
Good lady,
No court in Europe is too good for thee;
What dost thou then in prison?
Now, good sir,
You know me, do you not?

Gaoler:
For a worthy lady
And one whom much I honour.

PAULINA:
Pray you then,
Conduct me to the queen.

Gaoler:
I may not, madam:
To the contrary I have express commandment.

PAULINA:
Here's ado,
To lock up honesty and honour from
The access of gentle visitors!
Is't lawful, pray you,
To see her women? any of them? Emilia?

Gaoler:
So please you, madam,
To put apart these your attendants, I
Shall bring Emilia forth.

PAULINA:
I pray now, call her.
Withdraw yourselves.

Gaoler:
And, madam,
I must be present at your conference.

PAULINA:
Well, be't so, prithee.
Here's such ado to make no stain a stain
As passes colouring.
Dear gentlewoman,
How fares our gracious lady?

EMILIA:
As well as one so great and so forlorn
May hold together: on her frights and griefs,
Which never tender lady hath born greater,
She is something before her time deliver'd.

PAULINA:
A boy?

EMILIA:
A daughter, and a goodly babe,
Lusty and like to live: the queen receives
Much comfort in't; says 'My poor prisoner,
I am innocent as you.'

PAULINA:
I dare be sworn
These dangerous unsafe lunes i' the king,
beshrew them!
He must be told on't, and he shall: the office
Becomes a woman best; I'll take't upon me:
If I prove honey-mouth'd let my tongue blister
And never to my red-look'd anger be
The trumpet any more. Pray you, Emilia,
Commend my best obedience to the queen:
If she dares trust me with her little babe,
I'll show't the king and undertake to be
Her advocate to the loud'st. We do not know
How he may soften at the sight o' the child:
The silence often of pure innocence
Persuades when speaking fails.

EMILIA:
Most worthy madam,
Your honour and your goodness is so evident
That your free undertaking cannot miss
A thriving issue: there is no lady living
So meet for this great errand. Please your ladyship
To visit the next room, I'll presently
Acquaint the queen of your most noble offer;
Who but to-day hammer'd of this design,
But durst not tempt a minister of honour,
Lest she should be denied.

PAULINA:
Tell her, Emilia.
I'll use that tongue I have: if wit flow from't
As boldness from my bosom, let 't not be doubted
I shall do good.

EMILIA:
Now be you blest for it!
I'll to the queen: please you,
come something nearer.

Gaoler:
Madam, if't please the queen to send the babe,
I know not what I shall incur to pass it,
Having no warrant.

PAULINA:
You need not fear it, sir:
This child was prisoner to the womb and is
By law and process of great nature thence
Freed and enfranchised, not a party to
The anger of the king nor guilty of,
If any be, the trespass of the queen.

Gaoler:
I do believe it.

PAULINA:
Do not you fear: upon mine honour,
I will stand betwixt you and danger.

LEONTES:
Nor night nor day no rest: it is but weakness
To bear the matter thus; mere weakness. If
The cause were not in being,--part o' the cause,
She the adulteress; for the harlot king
Is quite beyond mine arm, out of the blank
And level of my brain, plot-proof; but she
I can hook to me: say that she were gone,
Given to the fire, a moiety of my rest
Might come to me again. Who's there?

First Servant:
My lord?

LEONTES:
How does the boy?

First Servant:
He took good rest to-night;
'Tis hoped his sickness is discharged.

LEONTES:
To see his nobleness!
Conceiving the dishonour of his mother,
He straight declined, droop'd, took it deeply,
Fasten'd and fix'd the shame on't in himself,
Threw off his spirit, his appetite, his sleep,
And downright languish'd. Leave me solely: go,
See how he fares.
Fie, fie! no thought of him:
The thought of my revenges that way
Recoil upon me: in himself too mighty,
And in his parties, his alliance; let him be
Until a time may serve: for present vengeance,
Take it on her. Camillo and Polixenes
Laugh at me, make their pastime at my sorrow:
They should not laugh if I could reach them, nor
Shall she within my power.

First Lord:
You must not enter.

PAULINA:
Nay, rather, good my lords, be second to me:
Fear you his tyrannous passion more, alas,
Than the queen's life? a gracious innocent soul,
More free than he is jealous.

ANTIGONUS:
That's enough.

Second Servant:
Madam, he hath not slept tonight; commanded
None should come at him.

PAULINA:
Not so hot, good sir:
I come to bring him sleep. 'Tis such as you,
That creep like shadows by him and do sigh
At each his needless heavings, such as you
Nourish the cause of his awaking: I
Do come with words as medicinal as true,
Honest as either, to purge him of that humour
That presses him from sleep.

LEONTES:
What noise there, ho?

PAULINA:
No noise, my lord; but needful conference
About some gossips for your highness.

LEONTES:
How!
Away with that audacious lady! Antigonus,
I charged thee that she should not come about me:
I knew she would.

ANTIGONUS:
I told her so, my lord,
On your displeasure's peril and on mine,
She should not visit you.

LEONTES:
What, canst not rule her?

PAULINA:
From all dishonesty he can: in this,
Unless he take the course that you have done,
Commit me for committing honour, trust it,
He shall not rule me.

ANTIGONUS:
La you now, you hear:
When she will take the rein I let her run;
But she'll not stumble.

PAULINA:
Good my liege, I come;
And, I beseech you, hear me, who profess
Myself your loyal servant, your physician,
Your most obedient counsellor, yet that dare
Less appear so in comforting your evils,
Than such as most seem yours: I say, I come
From your good queen.

LEONTES:
Good queen!

PAULINA:
Good queen, my lord,
Good queen; I say good queen;
And would by combat make her good, so were I
A man, the worst about you.

LEONTES:
Force her hence.

PAULINA:
Let him that makes but trifles of his eyes
First hand me: on mine own accord I'll off;
But first I'll do my errand. The good queen,
For she is good, hath brought you forth a daughter;
Here 'tis; commends it to your blessing.

LEONTES:
Out!
A mankind witch! Hence with her, out o' door:
A most intelligencing bawd!

PAULINA:
Not so:
I am as ignorant in that as you
In so entitling me, and no less honest
Than you are mad; which is enough, I'll warrant,
As this world goes, to pass for honest.

LEONTES:
Traitors!
Will you not push her out? Give her the bastard.
Thou dotard! thou art woman-tired, unroosted
By thy dame Partlet here. Take up the bastard;
Take't up, I say; give't to thy crone.

PAULINA:
For ever
Unvenerable be thy hands, if thou
Takest up the princess by that forced baseness
Which he has put upon't!

LEONTES:
He dreads his wife.

PAULINA:
So I would you did; then 'twere past all doubt
You'ld call your children yours.

LEONTES:
A nest of traitors!

ANTIGONUS:
I am none, by this good light.

PAULINA:
Nor I, nor any
But one that's here, and that's himself, for he
The sacred honour of himself, his queen's,
His hopeful son's, his babe's, betrays to slander,
Whose sting is sharper than the sword's;
and will not--
For, as the case now stands, it is a curse
He cannot be compell'd to't--once remove
The root of his opinion, which is rotten
As ever oak or stone was sound.

LEONTES:
A callat
Of boundless tongue, who late hath beat her husband
And now baits me! This brat is none of mine;
It is the issue of Polixenes:
Hence with it, and together with the dam
Commit them to the fire!

PAULINA:
It is yours;
And, might we lay the old proverb to your charge,
So like you, 'tis the worse. Behold, my lords,
Although the print be little, the whole matter
And copy of the father, eye, nose, lip,
The trick of's frown, his forehead, nay, the valley,
The pretty dimples of his chin and cheek,
His smiles,
The very mould and frame of hand, nail, finger:
And thou, good goddess Nature, which hast made it
So like to him that got it, if thou hast
The ordering of the mind too, 'mongst all colours
No yellow in't, lest she suspect, as he does,
Her children not her husband's!

LEONTES:
A gross hag
And, lozel, thou art worthy to be hang'd,
That wilt not stay her tongue.

ANTIGONUS:
Hang all the husbands
That cannot do that feat, you'll leave yourself
Hardly one subject.

LEONTES:
Once more, take her hence.

PAULINA:
A most unworthy and unnatural lord
Can do no more.

LEONTES:
I'll ha' thee burnt.

PAULINA:
I care not:
It is an heretic that makes the fire,
Not she which burns in't. I'll not call you tyrant;
But this most cruel usage of your queen,
Not able to produce more accusation
Than your own weak-hinged fancy, something savours
Of tyranny and will ignoble make you,
Yea, scandalous to the world.

LEONTES:
On your allegiance,
Out of the chamber with her! Were I a tyrant,
Where were her life? she durst not call me so,
If she did know me one. Away with her!

PAULINA:
I pray you, do not push me; I'll be gone.
Look to your babe, my lord; 'tis yours:
Jove send her
A better guiding spirit! What needs these hands?
You, that are thus so tender o'er his follies,
Will never do him good, not one of you.
So, so: farewell; we are gone.

LEONTES:
Thou, traitor, hast set on thy wife to this.
My child? away with't! Even thou, that hast
A heart so tender o'er it, take it hence
And see it instantly consumed with fire;
Even thou and none but thou. Take it up straight:
Within this hour bring me word 'tis done,
And by good testimony, or I'll seize thy life,
With what thou else call'st thine. If thou refuse
And wilt encounter with my wrath, say so;
The bastard brains with these my proper hands
Shall I dash out. Go, take it to the fire;
For thou set'st on thy wife.

ANTIGONUS:
I did not, sir:
These lords, my noble fellows, if they please,
Can clear me in't.

Lords:
We can: my royal liege,
He is not guilty of her coming hither.

LEONTES:
You're liars all.

First Lord:
Beseech your highness, give us better credit:
We have always truly served you, and beseech you
So to esteem of us, and on our knees we beg,
As recompense of our dear services
Past and to come, that you do change this purpose,
Which being so horrible, so bloody, must
Lead on to some foul issue: we all kneel.

LEONTES:
I am a feather for each wind that blows:
Shall I live on to see this bastard kneel
And call me father? better burn it now
Than curse it then. But be it; let it live.
It shall not neither. You, sir, come you hither;
You that have been so tenderly officious
With Lady Margery, your midwife there,
To save this bastard's life,--for 'tis a bastard,
So sure as this beard's grey,
--what will you adventure
To save this brat's life?

ANTIGONUS:
Any thing, my lord,
That my ability may undergo
And nobleness impose: at least thus much:
I'll pawn the little blood which I have left
To save the innocent: any thing possible.

LEONTES:
It shall be possible. Swear by this sword
Thou wilt perform my bidding.

ANTIGONUS:
I will, my lord.

LEONTES:
Mark and perform it, see'st thou! for the fail
Of any point in't shall not only be
Death to thyself but to thy lewd-tongued wife,
Whom for this time we pardon. We enjoin thee,
As thou art liege-man to us, that thou carry
This female bastard hence and that thou bear it
To some remote and desert place quite out
Of our dominions, and that there thou leave it,
Without more mercy, to its own protection
And favour of the climate. As by strange fortune
It came to us, I do in justice charge thee,
On thy soul's peril and thy body's torture,
That thou commend it strangely to some place
Where chance may nurse or end it. Take it up.

ANTIGONUS:
I swear to do this, though a present death
Had been more merciful. Come on, poor babe:
Some powerful spirit instruct the kites and ravens
To be thy nurses! Wolves and bears, they say
Casting their savageness aside have done
Like offices of pity. Sir, be prosperous
In more than this deed does require! And blessing
Against this cruelty fight on thy side,
Poor thing, condemn'd to loss!

LEONTES:
No, I'll not rear
Another's issue.

Servant:
Please your highness, posts
From those you sent to the oracle are come
An hour since: Cleomenes and Dion,
Being well arrived from Delphos, are both landed,
Hasting to the court.

First Lord:
So please you, sir, their speed
Hath been beyond account.

LEONTES:
Twenty-three days
They have been absent: 'tis good speed; foretells
The great Apollo suddenly will have
The truth of this appear. Prepare you, lords;
Summon a session, that we may arraign
Our most disloyal lady, for, as she hath
Been publicly accused, so shall she have
A just and open trial. While she lives
My heart will be a burthen to me. Leave me,
And think upon my bidding.

CLEOMENES:
The climate's delicate, the air most sweet,
Fertile the isle, the temple much surpassing
The common praise it bears.

DION:
I shall report,
For most it caught me, the celestial habits,
Methinks I so should term them, and the reverence
Of the grave wearers. O, the sacrifice!
How ceremonious, solemn and unearthly
It was i' the offering!

CLEOMENES:
But of all, the burst
And the ear-deafening voice o' the oracle,
Kin to Jove's thunder, so surprised my sense.
That I was nothing.

DION:
If the event o' the journey
Prove as successful to the queen,--O be't so!--
As it hath been to us rare, pleasant, speedy,
The time is worth the use on't.

CLEOMENES:
Great Apollo
Turn all to the best! These proclamations,
So forcing faults upon Hermione,
I little like.

DION:
The violent carriage of it
Will clear or end the business: when the oracle,
Thus by Apollo's great divine seal'd up,
Shall the contents discover, something rare
Even then will rush to knowledge. Go: fresh horses!
And gracious be the issue!

LEONTES:
This sessions, to our great grief we pronounce,
Even pushes 'gainst our heart: the party tried
The daughter of a king, our wife, and one
Of us too much beloved. Let us be clear'd
Of being tyrannous, since we so openly
Proceed in justice, which shall have due course,
Even to the guilt or the purgation.
Produce the prisoner.

Officer:
It is his highness' pleasure that the queen
Appear in person here in court. Silence!

LEONTES:
Read the indictment.

Officer:

HERMIONE:
Since what I am to say must be but that
Which contradicts my accusation and
The testimony on my part no other
But what comes from myself, it shall scarce boot me
To say 'not guilty:' mine integrity
Being counted falsehood, shall, as I express it,
Be so received. But thus: if powers divine
Behold our human actions, as they do,
I doubt not then but innocence shall make
False accusation blush and tyranny
Tremble at patience. You, my lord, best know,
Who least will seem to do so, my past life
Hath been as continent, as chaste, as true,
As I am now unhappy; which is more
Than history can pattern, though devised
And play'd to take spectators. For behold me
A fellow of the royal bed, which owe
A moiety of the throne a great king's daughter,
The mother to a hopeful prince, here standing
To prate and talk for life and honour 'fore
Who please to come and hear. For life, I prize it
As I weigh grief, which I would spare: for honour,
'Tis a derivative from me to mine,
And only that I stand for. I appeal
To your own conscience, sir, before Polixenes
Came to your court, how I was in your grace,
How merited to be so; since he came,
With what encounter so uncurrent I
Have strain'd to appear thus: if one jot beyond
The bound of honour, or in act or will
That way inclining, harden'd be the hearts
Of all that hear me, and my near'st of kin
Cry fie upon my grave!

LEONTES:
I ne'er heard yet
That any of these bolder vices wanted
Less impudence to gainsay what they did
Than to perform it first.

HERMIONE:
That's true enough;
Through 'tis a saying, sir, not due to me.

LEONTES:
You will not own it.

HERMIONE:
More than mistress of
Which comes to me in name of fault, I must not
At all acknowledge. For Polixenes,
With whom I am accused, I do confess
I loved him as in honour he required,
With such a kind of love as might become
A lady like me, with a love even such,
So and no other, as yourself commanded:
Which not to have done I think had been in me
Both disobedience and ingratitude
To you and toward your friend, whose love had spoke,
Even since it could speak, from an infant, freely
That it was yours. Now, for conspiracy,
I know not how it tastes; though it be dish'd
For me to try how: all I know of it
Is that Camillo was an honest man;
And why he left your court, the gods themselves,
Wotting no more than I, are ignorant.

LEONTES:
You knew of his departure, as you know
What you have underta'en to do in's absence.

HERMIONE:
Sir,
You speak a language that I understand not:
My life stands in the level of your dreams,
Which I'll lay down.

LEONTES:
Your actions are my dreams;
You had a bastard by Polixenes,
And I but dream'd it. As you were past all shame,--
Those of your fact are so--so past all truth:
Which to deny concerns more than avails; for as
Thy brat hath been cast out, like to itself,
No father owning it,--which is, indeed,
More criminal in thee than it,--so thou
Shalt feel our justice, in whose easiest passage
Look for no less than death.

HERMIONE:
Sir, spare your threats:
The bug which you would fright me with I seek.
To me can life be no commodity:
The crown and comfort of my life, your favour,
I do give lost; for I do feel it gone,
But know not how it went. My second joy
And first-fruits of my body, from his presence
I am barr'd, like one infectious. My third comfort
Starr'd most unluckily, is from my breast,
The innocent milk in its most innocent mouth,
Haled out to murder: myself on every post
Proclaimed a strumpet: with immodest hatred
The child-bed privilege denied, which 'longs
To women of all fashion; lastly, hurried
Here to this place, i' the open air, before
I have got strength of limit. Now, my liege,
Tell me what blessings I have here alive,
That I should fear to die? Therefore proceed.
But yet hear this: mistake me not; no life,
I prize it not a straw, but for mine honour,
Which I would free, if I shall be condemn'd
Upon surmises, all proofs sleeping else
But what your jealousies awake, I tell you
'Tis rigor and not law. Your honours all,
I do refer me to the oracle:
Apollo be my judge!

First Lord:
This your request
Is altogether just: therefore bring forth,
And in Apollos name, his oracle.

HERMIONE:
The Emperor of Russia was my father:
O that he were alive, and here beholding
His daughter's trial! that he did but see
The flatness of my misery, yet with eyes
Of pity, not revenge!

Officer:
You here shall swear upon this sword of justice,
That you, Cleomenes and Dion, have
Been both at Delphos, and from thence have brought
The seal'd-up oracle, by the hand deliver'd
Of great Apollo's priest; and that, since then,
You have not dared to break the holy seal
Nor read the secrets in't.

CLEOMENES:
All this we swear.

LEONTES:
Break up the seals and read.

Officer:

Lords:
Now blessed be the great Apollo!

HERMIONE:
Praised!

LEONTES:
Hast thou read truth?

Officer:
Ay, my lord; even so
As it is here set down.

LEONTES:
There is no truth at all i' the oracle:
The sessions shall proceed: this is mere falsehood.

Servant:
My lord the king, the king!

LEONTES:
What is the business?

Servant:
O sir, I shall be hated to report it!
The prince your son, with mere conceit and fear
Of the queen's speed, is gone.

LEONTES:
How! gone!

Servant:
Is dead.

LEONTES:
Apollo's angry; and the heavens themselves
Do strike at my injustice.
How now there!

PAULINA:
This news is mortal to the queen: look down
And see what death is doing.

LEONTES:
Take her hence:
Her heart is but o'ercharged; she will recover:
I have too much believed mine own suspicion:
Beseech you, tenderly apply to her
Some remedies for life.
Apollo, pardon
My great profaneness 'gainst thine oracle!
I'll reconcile me to Polixenes,
New woo my queen, recall the good Camillo,
Whom I proclaim a man of truth, of mercy;
For, being transported by my jealousies
To bloody thoughts and to revenge, I chose
Camillo for the minister to poison
My friend Polixenes: which had been done,
But that the good mind of Camillo tardied
My swift command, though I with death and with
Reward did threaten and encourage him,
Not doing 't and being done: he, most humane
And fill'd with honour, to my kingly guest
Unclasp'd my practise, quit his fortunes here,
Which you knew great, and to the hazard
Of all encertainties himself commended,
No richer than his honour: how he glisters
Thorough my rust! and how his pity
Does my deeds make the blacker!

PAULINA:
Woe the while!
O, cut my lace, lest my heart, cracking it,
Break too.

First Lord:
What fit is this, good lady?

PAULINA:
What studied torments, tyrant, hast for me?
What wheels? racks? fires? what flaying? boiling?
In leads or oils? what old or newer torture
Must I receive, whose every word deserves
To taste of thy most worst? Thy tyranny
Together working with thy jealousies,
Fancies too weak for boys, too green and idle
For girls of nine, O, think what they have done
And then run mad indeed, stark mad! for all
Thy by-gone fooleries were but spices of it.
That thou betray'dst Polixenes,'twas nothing;
That did but show thee, of a fool, inconstant
And damnable ingrateful: nor was't much,
Thou wouldst have poison'd good Camillo's honour,
To have him kill a king: poor trespasses,
More monstrous standing by: whereof I reckon
The casting forth to crows thy baby-daughter
To be or none or little; though a devil
Would have shed water out of fire ere done't:
Nor is't directly laid to thee, the death
Of the young prince, whose honourable thoughts,
Thoughts high for one so tender, cleft the heart
That could conceive a gross and foolish sire
Blemish'd his gracious dam: this is not, no,
Laid to thy answer: but the last,--O lords,
When I have said, cry 'woe!' the queen, the queen,
The sweet'st, dear'st creature's dead,
and vengeance for't
Not dropp'd down yet.

First Lord:
The higher powers forbid!

PAULINA:
I say she's dead; I'll swear't. If word nor oath
Prevail not, go and see: if you can bring
Tincture or lustre in her lip, her eye,
Heat outwardly or breath within, I'll serve you
As I would do the gods. But, O thou tyrant!
Do not repent these things, for they are heavier
Than all thy woes can stir; therefore betake thee
To nothing but despair. A thousand knees
Ten thousand years together, naked, fasting,
Upon a barren mountain and still winter
In storm perpetual, could not move the gods
To look that way thou wert.

LEONTES:
Go on, go on
Thou canst not speak too much; I have deserved
All tongues to talk their bitterest.

First Lord:
Say no more:
Howe'er the business goes, you have made fault
I' the boldness of your speech.

PAULINA:
I am sorry for't:
All faults I make, when I shall come to know them,
I do repent. Alas! I have show'd too much
The rashness of a woman: he is touch'd
To the noble heart. What's gone and what's past help
Should be past grief: do not receive affliction
At my petition; I beseech you, rather
Let me be punish'd, that have minded you
Of what you should forget. Now, good my liege
Sir, royal sir, forgive a foolish woman:
The love I bore your queen--lo, fool again!--
I'll speak of her no more, nor of your children;
I'll not remember you of my own lord,
Who is lost too: take your patience to you,
And I'll say nothing.

LEONTES:
Thou didst speak but well
When most the truth; which I receive much better
Than to be pitied of thee. Prithee, bring me
To the dead bodies of my queen and son:
One grave shall be for both: upon them shall
The causes of their death appear, unto
Our shame perpetual. Once a day I'll visit
The chapel where they lie, and tears shed there
Shall be my recreation: so long as nature
Will bear up with this exercise, so long
I daily vow to use it. Come and lead me
Unto these sorrows.

ANTIGONUS:
Thou art perfect then, our ship hath touch'd upon
The deserts of Bohemia?

Mariner:
Ay, my lord: and fear
We have landed in ill time: the skies look grimly
And threaten present blusters. In my conscience,
The heavens with that we have in hand are angry
And frown upon 's.

ANTIGONUS:
Their sacred wills be done! Go, get aboard;
Look to thy bark: I'll not be long before
I call upon thee.

Mariner:
Make your best haste, and go not
Too far i' the land: 'tis like to be loud weather;
Besides, this place is famous for the creatures
Of prey that keep upon't.

ANTIGONUS:
Go thou away:
I'll follow instantly.

Mariner:
I am glad at heart
To be so rid o' the business.

ANTIGONUS:
Come, poor babe:
I have heard, but not believed,
the spirits o' the dead
May walk again: if such thing be, thy mother
Appear'd to me last night, for ne'er was dream
So like a waking. To me comes a creature,
Sometimes her head on one side, some another;
I never saw a vessel of like sorrow,
So fill'd and so becoming: in pure white robes,
Like very sanctity, she did approach
My cabin where I lay; thrice bow'd before me,
And gasping to begin some speech, her eyes
Became two spouts: the fury spent, anon
Did this break-from her: 'Good Antigonus,
Since fate, against thy better disposition,
Hath made thy person for the thrower-out
Of my poor babe, according to thine oath,
Places remote enough are in Bohemia,
There weep and leave it crying; and, for the babe
Is counted lost for ever, Perdita,
I prithee, call't. For this ungentle business
Put on thee by my lord, thou ne'er shalt see
Thy wife Paulina more.' And so, with shrieks
She melted into air. Affrighted much,
I did in time collect myself and thought
This was so and no slumber. Dreams are toys:
Yet for this once, yea, superstitiously,
I will be squared by this. I do believe
Hermione hath suffer'd death, and that
Apollo would, this being indeed the issue
Of King Polixenes, it should here be laid,
Either for life or death, upon the earth
Of its right father. Blossom, speed thee well!
There lie, and there thy character: there these;
Which may, if fortune please, both breed thee, pretty,
And still rest thine. The storm begins; poor wretch,
That for thy mother's fault art thus exposed
To loss and what may follow! Weep I cannot,
But my heart bleeds; and most accursed am I
To be by oath enjoin'd to this. Farewell!
The day frowns more and more: thou'rt like to have
A lullaby too rough: I never saw
The heavens so dim by day. A savage clamour!
Well may I get aboard! This is the chase:
I am gone for ever.

Shepherd:
I would there were no age between sixteen and
three-and-twenty, or that youth would sleep out the
rest; for there is nothing in the between but
getting wenches with child, wronging the ancientry,
stealing, fighting--Hark you now! Would any but
these boiled brains of nineteen and two-and-twenty
hunt this weather? They have scared away two of my
best sheep, which I fear the wolf will sooner find
than the master: if any where I have them, 'tis by
the seaside, browsing of ivy. Good luck, an't be thy
will what have we here! Mercy on 's, a barne a very
pretty barne! A boy or a child, I wonder? A
pretty one; a very pretty one: sure, some 'scape:
though I am not bookish, yet I can read
waiting-gentlewoman in the 'scape. This has been
some stair-work, some trunk-work, some
behind-door-work: they were warmer that got this
than the poor thing is here. I'll take it up for
pity: yet I'll tarry till my son come; he hallooed
but even now. Whoa, ho, hoa!

Clown:
Hilloa, loa!

Shepherd:
What, art so near? If thou'lt see a thing to talk
on when thou art dead and rotten, come hither. What
ailest thou, man?

Clown:
I have seen two such sights, by sea and by land!
but I am not to say it is a sea, for it is now the
sky: betwixt the firmament and it you cannot thrust
a bodkin's point.

Shepherd:
Why, boy, how is it?

Clown:
I would you did but see how it chafes, how it rages,
how it takes up the shore! but that's not the
point. O, the most piteous cry of the poor souls!
sometimes to see 'em, and not to see 'em; now the
ship boring the moon with her main-mast, and anon
swallowed with yest and froth, as you'ld thrust a
cork into a hogshead. And then for the
land-service, to see how the bear tore out his
shoulder-bone; how he cried to me for help and said
his name was Antigonus, a nobleman. But to make an
end of the ship, to see how the sea flap-dragoned
it: but, first, how the poor souls roared, and the
sea mocked them; and how the poor gentleman roared
and the bear mocked him, both roaring louder than
the sea or weather.

Shepherd:
Name of mercy, when was this, boy?

Clown:
Now, now: I have not winked since I saw these
sights: the men are not yet cold under water, nor
the bear half dined on the gentleman: he's at it
now.

Shepherd:
Would I had been by, to have helped the old man!

Clown:
I would you had been by the ship side, to have
helped her: there your charity would have lacked footing.

Shepherd:
Heavy matters! heavy matters! but look thee here,
boy. Now bless thyself: thou mettest with things
dying, I with things newborn. Here's a sight for
thee; look thee, a bearing-cloth for a squire's
child! look thee here; take up, take up, boy;
open't. So, let's see: it was told me I should be
rich by the fairies. This is some changeling:
open't. What's within, boy?

Clown:
You're a made old man: if the sins of your youth
are forgiven you, you're well to live. Gold! all gold!

Shepherd:
This is fairy gold, boy, and 'twill prove so: up
with't, keep it close: home, home, the next way.
We are lucky, boy; and to be so still requires
nothing but secrecy. Let my sheep go: come, good
boy, the next way home.

Clown:
Go you the next way with your findings. I'll go see
if the bear be gone from the gentleman and how much
he hath eaten: they are never curst but when they
are hungry: if there be any of him left, I'll bury
it.

Shepherd:
That's a good deed. If thou mayest discern by that
which is left of him what he is, fetch me to the
sight of him.

Clown:
Marry, will I; and you shall help to put him i' the ground.

Shepherd:
'Tis a lucky day, boy, and we'll do good deeds on't.

Time:
I, that please some, try all, both joy and terror
Of good and bad, that makes and unfolds error,
Now take upon me, in the name of Time,
To use my wings. Impute it not a crime
To me or my swift passage, that I slide
O'er sixteen years and leave the growth untried
Of that wide gap, since it is in my power
To o'erthrow law and in one self-born hour
To plant and o'erwhelm custom. Let me pass
The same I am, ere ancient'st order was
Or what is now received: I witness to
The times that brought them in; so shall I do
To the freshest things now reigning and make stale
The glistering of this present, as my tale
Now seems to it. Your patience this allowing,
I turn my glass and give my scene such growing
As you had slept between: Leontes leaving,
The effects of his fond jealousies so grieving
That he shuts up himself, imagine me,
Gentle spectators, that I now may be
In fair Bohemia, and remember well,
I mentioned a son o' the king's, which Florizel
I now name to you; and with speed so pace
To speak of Perdita, now grown in grace
Equal with wondering: what of her ensues
I list not prophecy; but let Time's news
Be known when 'tis brought forth.
A shepherd's daughter,
And what to her adheres, which follows after,
Is the argument of Time. Of this allow,
If ever you have spent time worse ere now;
If never, yet that Time himself doth say
He wishes earnestly you never may.

POLIXENES:
I pray thee, good Camillo, be no more importunate:
'tis a sickness denying thee any thing; a death to
grant this.

CAMILLO:
It is fifteen years since I saw my country: though
I have for the most part been aired abroad, I
desire to lay my bones there. Besides, the penitent
king, my master, hath sent for me; to whose feeling
sorrows I might be some allay, or I o'erween to
think so, which is another spur to my departure.

POLIXENES:
As thou lovest me, Camillo, wipe not out the rest of
thy services by leaving me now: the need I have of
thee thine own goodness hath made; better not to
have had thee than thus to want thee: thou, having
made me businesses which none without thee can
sufficiently manage, must either stay to execute
them thyself or take away with thee the very
services thou hast done; which if I have not enough
considered, as too much I cannot, to be more
thankful to thee shall be my study, and my profit
therein the heaping friendships. Of that fatal
country, Sicilia, prithee speak no more; whose very
naming punishes me with the remembrance of that
penitent, as thou callest him, and reconciled king,
my brother; whose loss of his most precious queen
and children are even now to be afresh lamented.
Say to me, when sawest thou the Prince Florizel, my
son? Kings are no less unhappy, their issue not
being gracious, than they are in losing them when
they have approved their virtues.

CAMILLO:
Sir, it is three days since I saw the prince. What
his happier affairs may be, are to me unknown: but I
have missingly noted, he is of late much retired
from court and is less frequent to his princely
exercises than formerly he hath appeared.

POLIXENES:
I have considered so much, Camillo, and with some
care; so far that I have eyes under my service which
look upon his removedness; from whom I have this
intelligence, that he is seldom from the house of a
most homely shepherd; a man, they say, that from
very nothing, and beyond the imagination of his
neighbours, is grown into an unspeakable estate.

CAMILLO:
I have heard, sir, of such a man, who hath a
daughter of most rare note: the report of her is
extended more than can be thought to begin from such a cottage.

POLIXENES:
That's likewise part of my intelligence; but, I
fear, the angle that plucks our son thither. Thou
shalt accompany us to the place; where we will, not
appearing what we are, have some question with the
shepherd; from whose simplicity I think it not
uneasy to get the cause of my son's resort thither.
Prithee, be my present partner in this business, and
lay aside the thoughts of Sicilia.

CAMILLO:
I willingly obey your command.

POLIXENES:
My best Camillo! We must disguise ourselves.

AUTOLYCUS:
When daffodils begin to peer,
With heigh! the doxy over the dale,
Why, then comes in the sweet o' the year;
For the red blood reigns in the winter's pale.
The white sheet bleaching on the hedge,
With heigh! the sweet birds, O, how they sing!
Doth set my pugging tooth on edge;
For a quart of ale is a dish for a king.
The lark, that tirra-lyra chants,
With heigh! with heigh! the thrush and the jay,
Are summer songs for me and my aunts,
While we lie tumbling in the hay.
I have served Prince Florizel and in my time
wore three-pile; but now I am out of service:
But shall I go mourn for that, my dear?
The pale moon shines by night:
And when I wander here and there,
I then do most go right.
If tinkers may have leave to live,
And bear the sow-skin budget,
Then my account I well may, give,
And in the stocks avouch it.
My traffic is sheets; when the kite builds, look to
lesser linen. My father named me Autolycus; who
being, as I am, littered under Mercury, was likewise
a snapper-up of unconsidered trifles. With die and
drab I purchased this caparison, and my revenue is
the silly cheat. Gallows and knock are too powerful
on the highway: beating and hanging are terrors to
me: for the life to come, I sleep out the thought
of it. A prize! a prize!

Clown:
Let me see: every 'leven wether tods; every tod
yields pound and odd shilling; fifteen hundred
shorn. what comes the wool to?

AUTOLYCUS:

Clown:
I cannot do't without counters. Let me see; what am
I to buy for our sheep-shearing feast? Three pound
of sugar, five pound of currants, rice,--what will
this sister of mine do with rice? But my father
hath made her mistress of the feast, and she lays it
on. She hath made me four and twenty nose-gays for
the shearers, three-man-song-men all, and very good
ones; but they are most of them means and bases; but
one puritan amongst them, and he sings psalms to
horn-pipes. I must have saffron to colour the warden
pies; mace; dates?--none, that's out of my note;
nutmegs, seven; a race or two of ginger, but that I
may beg; four pound of prunes, and as many of
raisins o' the sun.

AUTOLYCUS:
O that ever I was born!

Clown:
I' the name of me--

AUTOLYCUS:
O, help me, help me! pluck but off these rags; and
then, death, death!

Clown:
Alack, poor soul! thou hast need of more rags to lay
on thee, rather than have these off.

AUTOLYCUS:
O sir, the loathsomeness of them offends me more
than the stripes I have received, which are mighty
ones and millions.

Clown:
Alas, poor man! a million of beating may come to a
great matter.

AUTOLYCUS:
I am robbed, sir, and beaten; my money and apparel
ta'en from me, and these detestable things put upon
me.

Clown:
What, by a horseman, or a footman?

AUTOLYCUS:
A footman, sweet sir, a footman.

Clown:
Indeed, he should be a footman by the garments he
has left with thee: if this be a horseman's coat,
it hath seen very hot service. Lend me thy hand,
I'll help thee: come, lend me thy hand.

AUTOLYCUS:
O, good sir, tenderly, O!

Clown:
Alas, poor soul!

AUTOLYCUS:
O, good sir, softly, good sir! I fear, sir, my
shoulder-blade is out.

Clown:
How now! canst stand?

AUTOLYCUS:

Clown:
Dost lack any money? I have a little money for thee.

AUTOLYCUS:
No, good sweet sir; no, I beseech you, sir: I have
a kinsman not past three quarters of a mile hence,
unto whom I was going; I shall there have money, or
any thing I want: offer me no money, I pray you;
that kills my heart.

Clown:
What manner of fellow was he that robbed you?

AUTOLYCUS:
A fellow, sir, that I have known to go about with
troll-my-dames; I knew him once a servant of the
prince: I cannot tell, good sir, for which of his
virtues it was, but he was certainly whipped out of the court.

Clown:
His vices, you would say; there's no virtue whipped
out of the court: they cherish it to make it stay
there; and yet it will no more but abide.

AUTOLYCUS:
Vices, I would say, sir. I know this man well: he
hath been since an ape-bearer; then a
process-server, a bailiff; then he compassed a
motion of the Prodigal Son, and married a tinker's
wife within a mile where my land and living lies;
and, having flown over many knavish professions, he
settled only in rogue: some call him Autolycus.

Clown:
Out upon him! prig, for my life, prig: he haunts
wakes, fairs and bear-baitings.

AUTOLYCUS:
Very true, sir; he, sir, he; that's the rogue that
put me into this apparel.

Clown:
Not a more cowardly rogue in all Bohemia: if you had
but looked big and spit at him, he'ld have run.

AUTOLYCUS:
I must confess to you, sir, I am no fighter: I am
false of heart that way; and that he knew, I warrant
him.

Clown:
How do you now?

AUTOLYCUS:
Sweet sir, much better than I was; I can stand and
walk: I will even take my leave of you, and pace
softly towards my kinsman's.

Clown:
Shall I bring thee on the way?

AUTOLYCUS:
No, good-faced sir; no, sweet sir.

Clown:
Then fare thee well: I must go buy spices for our
sheep-shearing.

AUTOLYCUS:
Prosper you, sweet sir!
Your purse is not hot enough to purchase your spice.
I'll be with you at your sheep-shearing too: if I
make not this cheat bring out another and the
shearers prove sheep, let me be unrolled and my name
put in the book of virtue!
Jog on, jog on, the foot-path way,
And merrily hent the stile-a:
A merry heart goes all the day,
Your sad tires in a mile-a.

FLORIZEL:
These your unusual weeds to each part of you
Do give a life: no shepherdess, but Flora
Peering in April's front. This your sheep-shearing
Is as a meeting of the petty gods,
And you the queen on't.

PERDITA:
Sir, my gracious lord,
To chide at your extremes it not becomes me:
O, pardon, that I name them! Your high self,
The gracious mark o' the land, you have obscured
With a swain's wearing, and me, poor lowly maid,
Most goddess-like prank'd up: but that our feasts
In every mess have folly and the feeders
Digest it with a custom, I should blush
To see you so attired, sworn, I think,
To show myself a glass.

FLORIZEL:
I bless the time
When my good falcon made her flight across
Thy father's ground.

PERDITA:
Now Jove afford you cause!
To me the difference forges dread; your greatness
Hath not been used to fear. Even now I tremble
To think your father, by some accident,
Should pass this way as you did: O, the Fates!
How would he look, to see his work so noble
Vilely bound up? What would he say? Or how
Should I, in these my borrow'd flaunts, behold
The sternness of his presence?

FLORIZEL:
Apprehend
Nothing but jollity. The gods themselves,
Humbling their deities to love, have taken
The shapes of beasts upon them: Jupiter
Became a bull, and bellow'd; the green Neptune
A ram, and bleated; and the fire-robed god,
Golden Apollo, a poor humble swain,
As I seem now. Their transformations
Were never for a piece of beauty rarer,
Nor in a way so chaste, since my desires
Run not before mine honour, nor my lusts
Burn hotter than my faith.

PERDITA:
O, but, sir,
Your resolution cannot hold, when 'tis
Opposed, as it must be, by the power of the king:
One of these two must be necessities,
Which then will speak, that you must
change this purpose,
Or I my life.

FLORIZEL:
Thou dearest Perdita,
With these forced thoughts, I prithee, darken not
The mirth o' the feast. Or I'll be thine, my fair,
Or not my father's. For I cannot be
Mine own, nor any thing to any, if
I be not thine. To this I am most constant,
Though destiny say no. Be merry, gentle;
Strangle such thoughts as these with any thing
That you behold the while. Your guests are coming:
Lift up your countenance, as it were the day
Of celebration of that nuptial which
We two have sworn shall come.

PERDITA:
O lady Fortune,
Stand you auspicious!

FLORIZEL:
See, your guests approach:
Address yourself to entertain them sprightly,
And let's be red with mirth.

Shepherd:
Fie, daughter! when my old wife lived, upon
This day she was both pantler, butler, cook,
Both dame and servant; welcomed all, served all;
Would sing her song and dance her turn; now here,
At upper end o' the table, now i' the middle;
On his shoulder, and his; her face o' fire
With labour and the thing she took to quench it,
She would to each one sip. You are retired,
As if you were a feasted one and not
The hostess of the meeting: pray you, bid
These unknown friends to's welcome; for it is
A way to make us better friends, more known.
Come, quench your blushes and present yourself
That which you are, mistress o' the feast: come on,
And bid us welcome to your sheep-shearing,
As your good flock shall prosper.

PERDITA:

POLIXENES:
Shepherdess,
A fair one are you--well you fit our ages
With flowers of winter.

PERDITA:
Sir, the year growing ancient,
Not yet on summer's death, nor on the birth
Of trembling winter, the fairest
flowers o' the season
Are our carnations and streak'd gillyvors,
Which some call nature's bastards: of that kind
Our rustic garden's barren; and I care not
To get slips of them.

POLIXENES:
Wherefore, gentle maiden,
Do you neglect them?

PERDITA:
For I have heard it said
There is an art which in their piedness shares
With great creating nature.

POLIXENES:
Say there be;
Yet nature is made better by no mean
But nature makes that mean: so, over that art
Which you say adds to nature, is an art
That nature makes. You see, sweet maid, we marry
A gentler scion to the wildest stock,
And make conceive a bark of baser kind
By bud of nobler race: this is an art
Which does mend nature, change it rather, but
The art itself is nature.

PERDITA:
So it is.

POLIXENES:
Then make your garden rich in gillyvors,
And do not call them bastards.

PERDITA:
I'll not put
The dibble in earth to set one slip of them;
No more than were I painted I would wish
This youth should say 'twere well and only therefore
Desire to breed by me. Here's flowers for you;
Hot lavender, mints, savoury, marjoram;
The marigold, that goes to bed wi' the sun
And with him rises weeping: these are flowers
Of middle summer, and I think they are given
To men of middle age. You're very welcome.

CAMILLO:
I should leave grazing, were I of your flock,
And only live by gazing.

PERDITA:
Out, alas!
You'd be so lean, that blasts of January
Would blow you through and through.
Now, my fair'st friend,
I would I had some flowers o' the spring that might
Become your time of day; and yours, and yours,
That wear upon your virgin branches yet
Your maidenheads growing: O Proserpina,
For the flowers now, that frighted thou let'st fall
From Dis's waggon! daffodils,
That come before the swallow dares, and take
The winds of March with beauty; violets dim,
But sweeter than the lids of Juno's eyes
Or Cytherea's breath; pale primroses
That die unmarried, ere they can behold
Bight Phoebus in his strength--a malady
Most incident to maids; bold oxlips and
The crown imperial; lilies of all kinds,
The flower-de-luce being one! O, these I lack,
To make you garlands of, and my sweet friend,
To strew him o'er and o'er!

FLORIZEL:
What, like a corse?

PERDITA:
No, like a bank for love to lie and play on;
Not like a corse; or if, not to be buried,
But quick and in mine arms. Come, take your flowers:
Methinks I play as I have seen them do
In Whitsun pastorals: sure this robe of mine
Does change my disposition.

FLORIZEL:
What you do
Still betters what is done. When you speak, sweet.
I'ld have you do it ever: when you sing,
I'ld have you buy and sell so, so give alms,
Pray so; and, for the ordering your affairs,
To sing them too: when you do dance, I wish you
A wave o' the sea, that you might ever do
Nothing but that; move still, still so,
And own no other function: each your doing,
So singular in each particular,
Crowns what you are doing in the present deed,
That all your acts are queens.

PERDITA:
O Doricles,
Your praises are too large: but that your youth,
And the true blood which peepeth fairly through't,
Do plainly give you out an unstain'd shepherd,
With wisdom I might fear, my Doricles,
You woo'd me the false way.

FLORIZEL:
I think you have
As little skill to fear as I have purpose
To put you to't. But come; our dance, I pray:
Your hand, my Perdita: so turtles pair,
That never mean to part.

PERDITA:
I'll swear for 'em.

POLIXENES:
This is the prettiest low-born lass that ever
Ran on the green-sward: nothing she does or seems
But smacks of something greater than herself,
Too noble for this place.

CAMILLO:
He tells her something
That makes her blood look out: good sooth, she is
The queen of curds and cream.

Clown:
Come on, strike up!

DORCAS:
Mopsa must be your mistress: marry, garlic,
To mend her kissing with!

MOPSA:
Now, in good time!

Clown:
Not a word, a word; we stand upon our manners.
Come, strike up!

POLIXENES:
Pray, good shepherd, what fair swain is this
Which dances with your daughter?

Shepherd:
They call him Doricles; and boasts himself
To have a worthy feeding: but I have it
Upon his own report and I believe it;
He looks like sooth. He says he loves my daughter:
I think so too; for never gazed the moon
Upon the water as he'll stand and read
As 'twere my daughter's eyes: and, to be plain.
I think there is not half a kiss to choose
Who loves another best.

POLIXENES:
She dances featly.

Shepherd:
So she does any thing; though I report it,
That should be silent: if young Doricles
Do light upon her, she shall bring him that
Which he not dreams of.

Servant:
O master, if you did but hear the pedlar at the
door, you would never dance again after a tabour and
pipe; no, the bagpipe could not move you: he sings
several tunes faster than you'll tell money; he
utters them as he had eaten ballads and all men's
ears grew to his tunes.

Clown:
He could never come better; he shall come in. I
love a ballad but even too well, if it be doleful
matter merrily set down, or a very pleasant thing
indeed and sung lamentably.

Servant:
He hath songs for man or woman, of all sizes; no
milliner can so fit his customers with gloves: he
has the prettiest love-songs for maids; so without
bawdry, which is strange; with such delicate
burthens of dildos and fadings, 'jump her and thump
her;' and where some stretch-mouthed rascal would,
as it were, mean mischief and break a foul gap into
the matter, he makes the maid to answer 'Whoop, do me
no harm, good man;' puts him off, slights him, with
'Whoop, do me no harm, good man.'

POLIXENES:
This is a brave fellow.

Clown:
Believe me, thou talkest of an admirable conceited
fellow. Has he any unbraided wares?

Servant:
He hath ribbons of an the colours i' the rainbow;
points more than all the lawyers in Bohemia can
learnedly handle, though they come to him by the
gross: inkles, caddisses, cambrics, lawns: why, he
sings 'em over as they were gods or goddesses; you
would think a smock were a she-angel, he so chants
to the sleeve-hand and the work about the square on't.

Clown:
Prithee bring him in; and let him approach singing.

PERDITA:
Forewarn him that he use no scurrilous words in 's tunes.

Clown:
You have of these pedlars, that have more in them
than you'ld think, sister.

PERDITA:
Ay, good brother, or go about to think.

AUTOLYCUS:
Lawn as white as driven snow;
Cyprus black as e'er was crow;
Gloves as sweet as damask roses;
Masks for faces and for noses;
Bugle bracelet, necklace amber,
Perfume for a lady's chamber;
Golden quoifs and stomachers,
For my lads to give their dears:
Pins and poking-sticks of steel,
What maids lack from head to heel:
Come buy of me, come; come buy, come buy;
Buy lads, or else your lasses cry: Come buy.

Clown:
If I were not in love with Mopsa, thou shouldst take
no money of me; but being enthralled as I am, it
will also be the bondage of certain ribbons and gloves.

MOPSA:
I was promised them against the feast; but they come
not too late now.

DORCAS:
He hath promised you more than that, or there be liars.

MOPSA:
He hath paid you all he promised you; may be, he has
paid you more, which will shame you to give him again.

Clown:
Is there no manners left among maids? will they
wear their plackets where they should bear their
faces? Is there not milking-time, when you are
going to bed, or kiln-hole, to whistle off these
secrets, but you must be tittle-tattling before all
our guests? 'tis well they are whispering: clamour
your tongues, and not a word more.

MOPSA:
I have done. Come, you promised me a tawdry-lace
and a pair of sweet gloves.

Clown:
Have I not told thee how I was cozened by the way
and lost all my money?

AUTOLYCUS:
And indeed, sir, there are cozeners abroad;
therefore it behoves men to be wary.

Clown:
Fear not thou, man, thou shalt lose nothing here.

AUTOLYCUS:
I hope so, sir; for I have about me many parcels of charge.

Clown:
What hast here? ballads?

MOPSA:
Pray now, buy some: I love a ballad in print o'
life, for then we are sure they are true.

AUTOLYCUS:
Here's one to a very doleful tune, how a usurer's
wife was brought to bed of twenty money-bags at a
burthen and how she longed to eat adders' heads and
toads carbonadoed.

MOPSA:
Is it true, think you?

AUTOLYCUS:
Very true, and but a month old.

DORCAS:
Bless me from marrying a usurer!

AUTOLYCUS:
Here's the midwife's name to't, one Mistress
Tale-porter, and five or six honest wives that were
present. Why should I carry lies abroad?

MOPSA:
Pray you now, buy it.

Clown:
Come on, lay it by: and let's first see moe
ballads; we'll buy the other things anon.

AUTOLYCUS:
Here's another ballad of a fish, that appeared upon
the coast on Wednesday the four-score of April,
forty thousand fathom above water, and sung this
ballad against the hard hearts of maids: it was
thought she was a woman and was turned into a cold
fish for she would not exchange flesh with one that
loved her: the ballad is very pitiful and as true.

DORCAS:
Is it true too, think you?

AUTOLYCUS:
Five justices' hands at it, and witnesses more than
my pack will hold.

Clown:
Lay it by too: another.

AUTOLYCUS:
This is a merry ballad, but a very pretty one.

MOPSA:
Let's have some merry ones.

AUTOLYCUS:
Why, this is a passing merry one and goes to
the tune of 'Two maids wooing a man:' there's
scarce a maid westward but she sings it; 'tis in
request, I can tell you.

MOPSA:
We can both sing it: if thou'lt bear a part, thou
shalt hear; 'tis in three parts.

DORCAS:
We had the tune on't a month ago.

AUTOLYCUS:
I can bear my part; you must know 'tis my
occupation; have at it with you.

AUTOLYCUS:
Get you hence, for I must go
Where it fits not you to know.

DORCAS:
Whither?

MOPSA:
O, whither?

DORCAS:
Whither?

MOPSA:
It becomes thy oath full well,
Thou to me thy secrets tell.

DORCAS:
Me too, let me go thither.

MOPSA:
Or thou goest to the orange or mill.

DORCAS:
If to either, thou dost ill.

AUTOLYCUS:
Neither.

DORCAS:
What, neither?

AUTOLYCUS:
Neither.

DORCAS:
Thou hast sworn my love to be.

MOPSA:
Thou hast sworn it more to me:
Then whither goest? say, whither?

Clown:
We'll have this song out anon by ourselves: my
father and the gentlemen are in sad talk, and we'll
not trouble them. Come, bring away thy pack after
me. Wenches, I'll buy for you both. Pedlar, let's
have the first choice. Follow me, girls.

AUTOLYCUS:
And you shall pay well for 'em.
Will you buy any tape,
Or lace for your cape,
My dainty duck, my dear-a?
Any silk, any thread,
Any toys for your head,
Of the new'st and finest, finest wear-a?
Come to the pedlar;
Money's a medler.
That doth utter all men's ware-a.

Servant:
Master, there is three carters, three shepherds,
three neat-herds, three swine-herds, that have made
themselves all men of hair, they call themselves
Saltiers, and they have a dance which the wenches
say is a gallimaufry of gambols, because they are
not in't; but they themselves are o' the mind, if it
be not too rough for some that know little but
bowling, it will please plentifully.

Shepherd:
Away! we'll none on 't: here has been too much
homely foolery already. I know, sir, we weary you.

POLIXENES:
You weary those that refresh us: pray, let's see
these four threes of herdsmen.

Servant:
One three of them, by their own report, sir, hath
danced before the king; and not the worst of the
three but jumps twelve foot and a half by the squier.

Shepherd:
Leave your prating: since these good men are
pleased, let them come in; but quickly now.

Servant:
Why, they stay at door, sir.

POLIXENES:
O, father, you'll know more of that hereafter.
Is it not too far gone? 'Tis time to part them.
He's simple and tells much.
How now, fair shepherd!
Your heart is full of something that does take
Your mind from feasting. Sooth, when I was young
And handed love as you do, I was wont
To load my she with knacks: I would have ransack'd
The pedlar's silken treasury and have pour'd it
To her acceptance; you have let him go
And nothing marted with him. If your lass
Interpretation should abuse and call this
Your lack of love or bounty, you were straited
For a reply, at least if you make a care
Of happy holding her.

FLORIZEL:
Old sir, I know
She prizes not such trifles as these are:
The gifts she looks from me are pack'd and lock'd
Up in my heart; which I have given already,
But not deliver'd. O, hear me breathe my life
Before this ancient sir, who, it should seem,
Hath sometime loved! I take thy hand, this hand,
As soft as dove's down and as white as it,
Or Ethiopian's tooth, or the fann'd
snow that's bolted
By the northern blasts twice o'er.

POLIXENES:
What follows this?
How prettily the young swain seems to wash
The hand was fair before! I have put you out:
But to your protestation; let me hear
What you profess.

FLORIZEL:
Do, and be witness to 't.

POLIXENES:
And this my neighbour too?

FLORIZEL:
And he, and more
Than he, and men, the earth, the heavens, and all:
That, were I crown'd the most imperial monarch,
Thereof most worthy, were I the fairest youth
That ever made eye swerve, had force and knowledge
More than was ever man's, I would not prize them
Without her love; for her employ them all;
Commend them and condemn them to her service
Or to their own perdition.

POLIXENES:
Fairly offer'd.

CAMILLO:
This shows a sound affection.

Shepherd:
But, my daughter,
Say you the like to him?

PERDITA:
I cannot speak
So well, nothing so well; no, nor mean better:
By the pattern of mine own thoughts I cut out
The purity of his.

Shepherd:
Take hands, a bargain!
And, friends unknown, you shall bear witness to 't:
I give my daughter to him, and will make
Her portion equal his.

FLORIZEL:
O, that must be
I' the virtue of your daughter: one being dead,
I shall have more than you can dream of yet;
Enough then for your wonder. But, come on,
Contract us 'fore these witnesses.

Shepherd:
Come, your hand;
And, daughter, yours.

POLIXENES:
Soft, swain, awhile, beseech you;
Have you a father?

FLORIZEL:
I have: but what of him?

POLIXENES:
Knows he of this?


--- End of file: shakespear_14.txt ---


FLORIZEL:
He neither does nor shall.

POLIXENES:
Methinks a father
Is at the nuptial of his son a guest
That best becomes the table. Pray you once more,
Is not your father grown incapable
Of reasonable affairs? is he not stupid
With age and altering rheums? can he speak? hear?
Know man from man? dispute his own estate?
Lies he not bed-rid? and again does nothing
But what he did being childish?

FLORIZEL:
No, good sir;
He has his health and ampler strength indeed
Than most have of his age.

POLIXENES:
By my white beard,
You offer him, if this be so, a wrong
Something unfilial: reason my son
Should choose himself a wife, but as good reason
The father, all whose joy is nothing else
But fair posterity, should hold some counsel
In such a business.

FLORIZEL:
I yield all this;
But for some other reasons, my grave sir,
Which 'tis not fit you know, I not acquaint
My father of this business.

POLIXENES:
Let him know't.

FLORIZEL:
He shall not.

POLIXENES:
Prithee, let him.

FLORIZEL:
No, he must not.

Shepherd:
Let him, my son: he shall not need to grieve
At knowing of thy choice.

FLORIZEL:
Come, come, he must not.
Mark our contract.

POLIXENES:
Mark your divorce, young sir,
Whom son I dare not call; thou art too base
To be acknowledged: thou a sceptre's heir,
That thus affect'st a sheep-hook! Thou old traitor,
I am sorry that by hanging thee I can
But shorten thy life one week. And thou, fresh piece
Of excellent witchcraft, who of force must know
The royal fool thou copest with,--

Shepherd:
O, my heart!

POLIXENES:
I'll have thy beauty scratch'd with briers, and made
More homely than thy state. For thee, fond boy,
If I may ever know thou dost but sigh
That thou no more shalt see this knack, as never
I mean thou shalt, we'll bar thee from succession;
Not hold thee of our blood, no, not our kin,
Far than Deucalion off: mark thou my words:
Follow us to the court. Thou churl, for this time,
Though full of our displeasure, yet we free thee
From the dead blow of it. And you, enchantment.--
Worthy enough a herdsman: yea, him too,
That makes himself, but for our honour therein,
Unworthy thee,--if ever henceforth thou
These rural latches to his entrance open,
Or hoop his body more with thy embraces,
I will devise a death as cruel for thee
As thou art tender to't.

PERDITA:
Even here undone!
I was not much afeard; for once or twice
I was about to speak and tell him plainly,
The selfsame sun that shines upon his court
Hides not his visage from our cottage but
Looks on alike. Will't please you, sir, be gone?
I told you what would come of this: beseech you,
Of your own state take care: this dream of mine,--
Being now awake, I'll queen it no inch farther,
But milk my ewes and weep.

CAMILLO:
Why, how now, father!
Speak ere thou diest.

Shepherd:
I cannot speak, nor think
Nor dare to know that which I know. O sir!
You have undone a man of fourscore three,
That thought to fill his grave in quiet, yea,
To die upon the bed my father died,
To lie close by his honest bones: but now
Some hangman must put on my shroud and lay me
Where no priest shovels in dust. O cursed wretch,
That knew'st this was the prince,
and wouldst adventure
To mingle faith with him! Undone! undone!
If I might die within this hour, I have lived
To die when I desire.

FLORIZEL:
Why look you so upon me?
I am but sorry, not afeard; delay'd,
But nothing alter'd: what I was, I am;
More straining on for plucking back, not following
My leash unwillingly.

CAMILLO:
Gracious my lord,
You know your father's temper: at this time
He will allow no speech, which I do guess
You do not purpose to him; and as hardly
Will he endure your sight as yet, I fear:
Then, till the fury of his highness settle,
Come not before him.

FLORIZEL:
I not purpose it.
I think, Camillo?

CAMILLO:
Even he, my lord.

PERDITA:
How often have I told you 'twould be thus!
How often said, my dignity would last
But till 'twere known!

FLORIZEL:
It cannot fail but by
The violation of my faith; and then
Let nature crush the sides o' the earth together
And mar the seeds within! Lift up thy looks:
From my succession wipe me, father; I
Am heir to my affection.

CAMILLO:
Be advised.

FLORIZEL:
I am, and by my fancy: if my reason
Will thereto be obedient, I have reason;
If not, my senses, better pleased with madness,
Do bid it welcome.

CAMILLO:
This is desperate, sir.

FLORIZEL:
So call it: but it does fulfil my vow;
I needs must think it honesty. Camillo,
Not for Bohemia, nor the pomp that may
Be thereat glean'd, for all the sun sees or
The close earth wombs or the profound sea hides
In unknown fathoms, will I break my oath
To this my fair beloved: therefore, I pray you,
As you have ever been my father's honour'd friend,
When he shall miss me,--as, in faith, I mean not
To see him any more,--cast your good counsels
Upon his passion; let myself and fortune
Tug for the time to come. This you may know
And so deliver, I am put to sea
With her whom here I cannot hold on shore;
And most opportune to our need I have
A vessel rides fast by, but not prepared
For this design. What course I mean to hold
Shall nothing benefit your knowledge, nor
Concern me the reporting.

CAMILLO:
O my lord!
I would your spirit were easier for advice,
Or stronger for your need.

FLORIZEL:
Hark, Perdita
I'll hear you by and by.

CAMILLO:
He's irremoveable,
Resolved for flight. Now were I happy, if
His going I could frame to serve my turn,
Save him from danger, do him love and honour,
Purchase the sight again of dear Sicilia
And that unhappy king, my master, whom
I so much thirst to see.

FLORIZEL:
Now, good Camillo;
I am so fraught with curious business that
I leave out ceremony.

CAMILLO:
Sir, I think
You have heard of my poor services, i' the love
That I have borne your father?

FLORIZEL:
Very nobly
Have you deserved: it is my father's music
To speak your deeds, not little of his care
To have them recompensed as thought on.

CAMILLO:
Well, my lord,
If you may please to think I love the king
And through him what is nearest to him, which is
Your gracious self, embrace but my direction:
If your more ponderous and settled project
May suffer alteration, on mine honour,
I'll point you where you shall have such receiving
As shall become your highness; where you may
Enjoy your mistress, from the whom, I see,
There's no disjunction to be made, but by--
As heavens forefend!--your ruin; marry her,
And, with my best endeavours in your absence,
Your discontenting father strive to qualify
And bring him up to liking.

FLORIZEL:
How, Camillo,
May this, almost a miracle, be done?
That I may call thee something more than man
And after that trust to thee.

CAMILLO:
Have you thought on
A place whereto you'll go?

FLORIZEL:
Not any yet:
But as the unthought-on accident is guilty
To what we wildly do, so we profess
Ourselves to be the slaves of chance and flies
Of every wind that blows.

CAMILLO:
Then list to me:
This follows, if you will not change your purpose
But undergo this flight, make for Sicilia,
And there present yourself and your fair princess,
For so I see she must be, 'fore Leontes:
She shall be habited as it becomes
The partner of your bed. Methinks I see
Leontes opening his free arms and weeping
His welcomes forth; asks thee the son forgiveness,
As 'twere i' the father's person; kisses the hands
Of your fresh princess; o'er and o'er divides him
'Twixt his unkindness and his kindness; the one
He chides to hell and bids the other grow
Faster than thought or time.

FLORIZEL:
Worthy Camillo,
What colour for my visitation shall I
Hold up before him?

CAMILLO:
Sent by the king your father
To greet him and to give him comforts. Sir,
The manner of your bearing towards him, with
What you as from your father shall deliver,
Things known betwixt us three, I'll write you down:
The which shall point you forth at every sitting
What you must say; that he shall not perceive
But that you have your father's bosom there
And speak his very heart.

FLORIZEL:
I am bound to you:
There is some sap in this.

CAMILLO:
A cause more promising
Than a wild dedication of yourselves
To unpath'd waters, undream'd shores, most certain
To miseries enough; no hope to help you,
But as you shake off one to take another;
Nothing so certain as your anchors, who
Do their best office, if they can but stay you
Where you'll be loath to be: besides you know
Prosperity's the very bond of love,
Whose fresh complexion and whose heart together
Affliction alters.

PERDITA:
One of these is true:
I think affliction may subdue the cheek,
But not take in the mind.

CAMILLO:
Yea, say you so?
There shall not at your father's house these
seven years
Be born another such.

FLORIZEL:
My good Camillo,
She is as forward of her breeding as
She is i' the rear our birth.

CAMILLO:
I cannot say 'tis pity
She lacks instructions, for she seems a mistress
To most that teach.

PERDITA:
Your pardon, sir; for this
I'll blush you thanks.

FLORIZEL:
My prettiest Perdita!
But O, the thorns we stand upon! Camillo,
Preserver of my father, now of me,
The medicine of our house, how shall we do?
We are not furnish'd like Bohemia's son,
Nor shall appear in Sicilia.

CAMILLO:
My lord,
Fear none of this: I think you know my fortunes
Do all lie there: it shall be so my care
To have you royally appointed as if
The scene you play were mine. For instance, sir,
That you may know you shall not want, one word.

AUTOLYCUS:
Ha, ha! what a fool Honesty is! and Trust, his
sworn brother, a very simple gentleman! I have sold
all my trumpery; not a counterfeit stone, not a
ribbon, glass, pomander, brooch, table-book, ballad,
knife, tape, glove, shoe-tie, bracelet, horn-ring,
to keep my pack from fasting: they throng who
should buy first, as if my trinkets had been
hallowed and brought a benediction to the buyer:
by which means I saw whose purse was best in
picture; and what I saw, to my good use I
remembered. My clown, who wants but something to
be a reasonable man, grew so in love with the
wenches' song, that he would not stir his pettitoes
till he had both tune and words; which so drew the
rest of the herd to me that all their other senses
stuck in ears: you might have pinched a placket, it
was senseless; 'twas nothing to geld a codpiece of a
purse; I could have filed keys off that hung in
chains: no hearing, no feeling, but my sir's song,
and admiring the nothing of it. So that in this
time of lethargy I picked and cut most of their
festival purses; and had not the old man come in
with a whoo-bub against his daughter and the king's
son and scared my choughs from the chaff, I had not
left a purse alive in the whole army.

CAMILLO:
Nay, but my letters, by this means being there
So soon as you arrive, shall clear that doubt.

FLORIZEL:
And those that you'll procure from King Leontes--

CAMILLO:
Shall satisfy your father.

PERDITA:
Happy be you!
All that you speak shows fair.

CAMILLO:
Who have we here?
We'll make an instrument of this, omit
Nothing may give us aid.

AUTOLYCUS:
If they have overheard me now, why, hanging.

CAMILLO:
How now, good fellow! why shakest thou so? Fear
not, man; here's no harm intended to thee.

AUTOLYCUS:
I am a poor fellow, sir.

CAMILLO:
Why, be so still; here's nobody will steal that from
thee: yet for the outside of thy poverty we must
make an exchange; therefore discase thee instantly,
--thou must think there's a necessity in't,--and
change garments with this gentleman: though the
pennyworth on his side be the worst, yet hold thee,
there's some boot.

AUTOLYCUS:
I am a poor fellow, sir.
I know ye well enough.

CAMILLO:
Nay, prithee, dispatch: the gentleman is half
flayed already.

AUTOLYCUS:
Are you in earnest, sir?
I smell the trick on't.

FLORIZEL:
Dispatch, I prithee.

AUTOLYCUS:
Indeed, I have had earnest: but I cannot with
conscience take it.

CAMILLO:
Unbuckle, unbuckle.
Fortunate mistress,--let my prophecy
Come home to ye!--you must retire yourself
Into some covert: take your sweetheart's hat
And pluck it o'er your brows, muffle your face,
Dismantle you, and, as you can, disliken
The truth of your own seeming; that you may--
For I do fear eyes over--to shipboard
Get undescried.

PERDITA:
I see the play so lies
That I must bear a part.

CAMILLO:
No remedy.
Have you done there?

FLORIZEL:
Should I now meet my father,
He would not call me son.

CAMILLO:
Nay, you shall have no hat.
Come, lady, come. Farewell, my friend.

AUTOLYCUS:
Adieu, sir.

FLORIZEL:
O Perdita, what have we twain forgot!
Pray you, a word.

CAMILLO:

FLORIZEL:
Fortune speed us!
Thus we set on, Camillo, to the sea-side.

CAMILLO:
The swifter speed the better.

AUTOLYCUS:
I understand the business, I hear it: to have an
open ear, a quick eye, and a nimble hand, is
necessary for a cut-purse; a good nose is requisite
also, to smell out work for the other senses. I see
this is the time that the unjust man doth thrive.
What an exchange had this been without boot! What
a boot is here with this exchange! Sure the gods do
this year connive at us, and we may do any thing
extempore. The prince himself is about a piece of
iniquity, stealing away from his father with his
clog at his heels: if I thought it were a piece of
honesty to acquaint the king withal, I would not
do't: I hold it the more knavery to conceal it;
and therein am I constant to my profession.
Aside, aside; here is more matter for a hot brain:
every lane's end, every shop, church, session,
hanging, yields a careful man work.

Clown:
See, see; what a man you are now!
There is no other way but to tell the king
she's a changeling and none of your flesh and blood.

Shepherd:
Nay, but hear me.

Clown:
Nay, but hear me.

Shepherd:
Go to, then.

Clown:
She being none of your flesh and blood, your flesh
and blood has not offended the king; and so your
flesh and blood is not to be punished by him. Show
those things you found about her, those secret
things, all but what she has with her: this being
done, let the law go whistle: I warrant you.

Shepherd:
I will tell the king all, every word, yea, and his
son's pranks too; who, I may say, is no honest man,
neither to his father nor to me, to go about to make
me the king's brother-in-law.

Clown:
Indeed, brother-in-law was the farthest off you
could have been to him and then your blood had been
the dearer by I know how much an ounce.

AUTOLYCUS:

Shepherd:
Well, let us to the king: there is that in this
fardel will make him scratch his beard.

AUTOLYCUS:

Clown:
Pray heartily he be at palace.

AUTOLYCUS:

Shepherd:
To the palace, an it like your worship.

AUTOLYCUS:
Your affairs there, what, with whom, the condition
of that fardel, the place of your dwelling, your
names, your ages, of what having, breeding, and any
thing that is fitting to be known, discover.

Clown:
We are but plain fellows, sir.

AUTOLYCUS:
A lie; you are rough and hairy. Let me have no
lying: it becomes none but tradesmen, and they
often give us soldiers the lie: but we pay them for
it with stamped coin, not stabbing steel; therefore
they do not give us the lie.

Clown:
Your worship had like to have given us one, if you
had not taken yourself with the manner.

Shepherd:
Are you a courtier, an't like you, sir?

AUTOLYCUS:
Whether it like me or no, I am a courtier. Seest
thou not the air of the court in these enfoldings?
hath not my gait in it the measure of the court?
receives not thy nose court-odor from me? reflect I
not on thy baseness court-contempt? Thinkest thou,
for that I insinuate, or toaze from thee thy
business, I am therefore no courtier? I am courtier
cap-a-pe; and one that will either push on or pluck
back thy business there: whereupon I command thee to
open thy affair.

Shepherd:
My business, sir, is to the king.

AUTOLYCUS:
What advocate hast thou to him?

Shepherd:
I know not, an't like you.

Clown:
Advocate's the court-word for a pheasant: say you
have none.

Shepherd:
None, sir; I have no pheasant, cock nor hen.

AUTOLYCUS:
How blessed are we that are not simple men!
Yet nature might have made me as these are,
Therefore I will not disdain.

Clown:
This cannot be but a great courtier.

Shepherd:
His garments are rich, but he wears
them not handsomely.

Clown:
He seems to be the more noble in being fantastical:
a great man, I'll warrant; I know by the picking
on's teeth.

AUTOLYCUS:
The fardel there? what's i' the fardel?
Wherefore that box?

Shepherd:
Sir, there lies such secrets in this fardel and box,
which none must know but the king; and which he
shall know within this hour, if I may come to the
speech of him.

AUTOLYCUS:
Age, thou hast lost thy labour.

Shepherd:
Why, sir?

AUTOLYCUS:
The king is not at the palace; he is gone aboard a
new ship to purge melancholy and air himself: for,
if thou beest capable of things serious, thou must
know the king is full of grief.

Shepard:
So 'tis said, sir; about his son, that should have
married a shepherd's daughter.

AUTOLYCUS:
If that shepherd be not in hand-fast, let him fly:
the curses he shall have, the tortures he shall
feel, will break the back of man, the heart of monster.

Clown:
Think you so, sir?

AUTOLYCUS:
Not he alone shall suffer what wit can make heavy
and vengeance bitter; but those that are germane to
him, though removed fifty times, shall all come
under the hangman: which though it be great pity,
yet it is necessary. An old sheep-whistling rogue a
ram-tender, to offer to have his daughter come into
grace! Some say he shall be stoned; but that death
is too soft for him, say I draw our throne into a
sheep-cote! all deaths are too few, the sharpest too easy.

Clown:
Has the old man e'er a son, sir, do you hear. an't
like you, sir?

AUTOLYCUS:
He has a son, who shall be flayed alive; then
'nointed over with honey, set on the head of a
wasp's nest; then stand till he be three quarters
and a dram dead; then recovered again with
aqua-vitae or some other hot infusion; then, raw as
he is, and in the hottest day prognostication
proclaims, shall be be set against a brick-wall, the
sun looking with a southward eye upon him, where he
is to behold him with flies blown to death. But what
talk we of these traitorly rascals, whose miseries
are to be smiled at, their offences being so
capital? Tell me, for you seem to be honest plain
men, what you have to the king: being something
gently considered, I'll bring you where he is
aboard, tender your persons to his presence,
whisper him in your behalfs; and if it be in man
besides the king to effect your suits, here is man
shall do it.

Clown:
He seems to be of great authority: close with him,
give him gold; and though authority be a stubborn
bear, yet he is oft led by the nose with gold: show
the inside of your purse to the outside of his hand,
and no more ado. Remember 'stoned,' and 'flayed alive.'

Shepherd:
An't please you, sir, to undertake the business for
us, here is that gold I have: I'll make it as much
more and leave this young man in pawn till I bring it you.

AUTOLYCUS:
After I have done what I promised?

Shepherd:
Ay, sir.

AUTOLYCUS:
Well, give me the moiety. Are you a party in this business?

Clown:
In some sort, sir: but though my case be a pitiful
one, I hope I shall not be flayed out of it.

AUTOLYCUS:
O, that's the case of the shepherd's son: hang him,
he'll be made an example.

Clown:
Comfort, good comfort! We must to the king and show
our strange sights: he must know 'tis none of your
daughter nor my sister; we are gone else. Sir, I
will give you as much as this old man does when the
business is performed, and remain, as he says, your
pawn till it be brought you.

AUTOLYCUS:
I will trust you. Walk before toward the sea-side;
go on the right hand: I will but look upon the
hedge and follow you.

Clown:
We are blest in this man, as I may say, even blest.

Shepherd:
Let's before as he bids us: he was provided to do us good.

AUTOLYCUS:
If I had a mind to be honest, I see Fortune would
not suffer me: she drops booties in my mouth. I am
courted now with a double occasion, gold and a means
to do the prince my master good; which who knows how
that may turn back to my advancement? I will bring
these two moles, these blind ones, aboard him: if he
think it fit to shore them again and that the
complaint they have to the king concerns him
nothing, let him call me rogue for being so far
officious; for I am proof against that title and
what shame else belongs to't. To him will I present
them: there may be matter in it.

CLEOMENES:
Sir, you have done enough, and have perform'd
A saint-like sorrow: no fault could you make,
Which you have not redeem'd; indeed, paid down
More penitence than done trespass: at the last,
Do as the heavens have done, forget your evil;
With them forgive yourself.

LEONTES:
Whilst I remember
Her and her virtues, I cannot forget
My blemishes in them, and so still think of
The wrong I did myself; which was so much,
That heirless it hath made my kingdom and
Destroy'd the sweet'st companion that e'er man
Bred his hopes out of.

PAULINA:
True, too true, my lord:
If, one by one, you wedded all the world,
Or from the all that are took something good,
To make a perfect woman, she you kill'd
Would be unparallel'd.

LEONTES:
I think so. Kill'd!
She I kill'd! I did so: but thou strikest me
Sorely, to say I did; it is as bitter
Upon thy tongue as in my thought: now, good now,
Say so but seldom.

CLEOMENES:
Not at all, good lady:
You might have spoken a thousand things that would
Have done the time more benefit and graced
Your kindness better.

PAULINA:
You are one of those
Would have him wed again.

DION:
If you would not so,
You pity not the state, nor the remembrance
Of his most sovereign name; consider little
What dangers, by his highness' fail of issue,
May drop upon his kingdom and devour
Incertain lookers on. What were more holy
Than to rejoice the former queen is well?
What holier than, for royalty's repair,
For present comfort and for future good,
To bless the bed of majesty again
With a sweet fellow to't?

PAULINA:
There is none worthy,
Respecting her that's gone. Besides, the gods
Will have fulfill'd their secret purposes;
For has not the divine Apollo said,
Is't not the tenor of his oracle,
That King Leontes shall not have an heir
Till his lost child be found? which that it shall,
Is all as monstrous to our human reason
As my Antigonus to break his grave
And come again to me; who, on my life,
Did perish with the infant. 'Tis your counsel
My lord should to the heavens be contrary,
Oppose against their wills.
Care not for issue;
The crown will find an heir: great Alexander
Left his to the worthiest; so his successor
Was like to be the best.

LEONTES:
Good Paulina,
Who hast the memory of Hermione,
I know, in honour, O, that ever I
Had squared me to thy counsel! then, even now,
I might have look'd upon my queen's full eyes,
Have taken treasure from her lips--

PAULINA:
And left them
More rich for what they yielded.

LEONTES:
Thou speak'st truth.
No more such wives; therefore, no wife: one worse,
And better used, would make her sainted spirit
Again possess her corpse, and on this stage,
Where we're offenders now, appear soul-vex'd,
And begin, 'Why to me?'

PAULINA:
Had she such power,
She had just cause.

LEONTES:
She had; and would incense me
To murder her I married.

PAULINA:
I should so.
Were I the ghost that walk'd, I'ld bid you mark
Her eye, and tell me for what dull part in't
You chose her; then I'ld shriek, that even your ears
Should rift to hear me; and the words that follow'd
Should be 'Remember mine.'

LEONTES:
Stars, stars,
And all eyes else dead coals! Fear thou no wife;
I'll have no wife, Paulina.

PAULINA:
Will you swear
Never to marry but by my free leave?

LEONTES:
Never, Paulina; so be blest my spirit!

PAULINA:
Then, good my lords, bear witness to his oath.

CLEOMENES:
You tempt him over-much.

PAULINA:
Unless another,
As like Hermione as is her picture,
Affront his eye.

CLEOMENES:
Good madam,--

PAULINA:
I have done.
Yet, if my lord will marry,--if you will, sir,
No remedy, but you will,--give me the office
To choose you a queen: she shall not be so young
As was your former; but she shall be such
As, walk'd your first queen's ghost,
it should take joy
To see her in your arms.

LEONTES:
My true Paulina,
We shall not marry till thou bid'st us.

PAULINA:
That
Shall be when your first queen's again in breath;
Never till then.

Gentleman:
One that gives out himself Prince Florizel,
Son of Polixenes, with his princess, she
The fairest I have yet beheld, desires access
To your high presence.

LEONTES:
What with him? he comes not
Like to his father's greatness: his approach,
So out of circumstance and sudden, tells us
'Tis not a visitation framed, but forced
By need and accident. What train?

Gentleman:
But few,
And those but mean.

LEONTES:
His princess, say you, with him?

Gentleman:
Ay, the most peerless piece of earth, I think,
That e'er the sun shone bright on.

PAULINA:
O Hermione,
As every present time doth boast itself
Above a better gone, so must thy grave
Give way to what's seen now! Sir, you yourself
Have said and writ so, but your writing now
Is colder than that theme, 'She had not been,
Nor was not to be equall'd;'--thus your verse
Flow'd with her beauty once: 'tis shrewdly ebb'd,
To say you have seen a better.

Gentleman:
Pardon, madam:
The one I have almost forgot,--your pardon,--
The other, when she has obtain'd your eye,
Will have your tongue too. This is a creature,
Would she begin a sect, might quench the zeal
Of all professors else, make proselytes
Of who she but bid follow.

PAULINA:
How! not women?

Gentleman:
Women will love her, that she is a woman
More worth than any man; men, that she is
The rarest of all women.

LEONTES:
Go, Cleomenes;
Yourself, assisted with your honour'd friends,
Bring them to our embracement. Still, 'tis strange
He thus should steal upon us.

PAULINA:
Had our prince,
Jewel of children, seen this hour, he had pair'd
Well with this lord: there was not full a month
Between their births.

LEONTES:
Prithee, no more; cease; thou know'st
He dies to me again when talk'd of: sure,
When I shall see this gentleman, thy speeches
Will bring me to consider that which may
Unfurnish me of reason. They are come.
Your mother was most true to wedlock, prince;
For she did print your royal father off,
Conceiving you: were I but twenty-one,
Your father's image is so hit in you,
His very air, that I should call you brother,
As I did him, and speak of something wildly
By us perform'd before. Most dearly welcome!
And your fair princess,--goddess!--O, alas!
I lost a couple, that 'twixt heaven and earth
Might thus have stood begetting wonder as
You, gracious couple, do: and then I lost--
All mine own folly--the society,
Amity too, of your brave father, whom,
Though bearing misery, I desire my life
Once more to look on him.

FLORIZEL:
By his command
Have I here touch'd Sicilia and from him
Give you all greetings that a king, at friend,
Can send his brother: and, but infirmity
Which waits upon worn times hath something seized
His wish'd ability, he had himself
The lands and waters 'twixt your throne and his
Measured to look upon you; whom he loves--
He bade me say so--more than all the sceptres
And those that bear them living.

LEONTES:
O my brother,
Good gentleman! the wrongs I have done thee stir
Afresh within me, and these thy offices,
So rarely kind, are as interpreters
Of my behind-hand slackness. Welcome hither,
As is the spring to the earth. And hath he too
Exposed this paragon to the fearful usage,
At least ungentle, of the dreadful Neptune,
To greet a man not worth her pains, much less
The adventure of her person?

FLORIZEL:
Good my lord,
She came from Libya.

LEONTES:
Where the warlike Smalus,
That noble honour'd lord, is fear'd and loved?

FLORIZEL:
Most royal sir, from thence; from him, whose daughter
His tears proclaim'd his, parting with her: thence,
A prosperous south-wind friendly, we have cross'd,
To execute the charge my father gave me
For visiting your highness: my best train
I have from your Sicilian shores dismiss'd;
Who for Bohemia bend, to signify
Not only my success in Libya, sir,
But my arrival and my wife's in safety
Here where we are.

LEONTES:
The blessed gods
Purge all infection from our air whilst you
Do climate here! You have a holy father,
A graceful gentleman; against whose person,
So sacred as it is, I have done sin:
For which the heavens, taking angry note,
Have left me issueless; and your father's blest,
As he from heaven merits it, with you
Worthy his goodness. What might I have been,
Might I a son and daughter now have look'd on,
Such goodly things as you!

Lord:
Most noble sir,
That which I shall report will bear no credit,
Were not the proof so nigh. Please you, great sir,
Bohemia greets you from himself by me;
Desires you to attach his son, who has--
His dignity and duty both cast off--
Fled from his father, from his hopes, and with
A shepherd's daughter.

LEONTES:
Where's Bohemia? speak.

Lord:
Here in your city; I now came from him:
I speak amazedly; and it becomes
My marvel and my message. To your court
Whiles he was hastening, in the chase, it seems,
Of this fair couple, meets he on the way
The father of this seeming lady and
Her brother, having both their country quitted
With this young prince.

FLORIZEL:
Camillo has betray'd me;
Whose honour and whose honesty till now
Endured all weathers.

Lord:
Lay't so to his charge:
He's with the king your father.

LEONTES:
Who? Camillo?

Lord:
Camillo, sir; I spake with him; who now
Has these poor men in question. Never saw I
Wretches so quake: they kneel, they kiss the earth;
Forswear themselves as often as they speak:
Bohemia stops his ears, and threatens them
With divers deaths in death.

PERDITA:
O my poor father!
The heaven sets spies upon us, will not have
Our contract celebrated.

LEONTES:
You are married?

FLORIZEL:
We are not, sir, nor are we like to be;
The stars, I see, will kiss the valleys first:
The odds for high and low's alike.

LEONTES:
My lord,
Is this the daughter of a king?

FLORIZEL:
She is,
When once she is my wife.

LEONTES:
That 'once' I see by your good father's speed
Will come on very slowly. I am sorry,
Most sorry, you have broken from his liking
Where you were tied in duty, and as sorry
Your choice is not so rich in worth as beauty,
That you might well enjoy her.

FLORIZEL:
Dear, look up:
Though Fortune, visible an enemy,
Should chase us with my father, power no jot
Hath she to change our loves. Beseech you, sir,
Remember since you owed no more to time
Than I do now: with thought of such affections,
Step forth mine advocate; at your request
My father will grant precious things as trifles.

LEONTES:
Would he do so, I'ld beg your precious mistress,
Which he counts but a trifle.

PAULINA:
Sir, my liege,
Your eye hath too much youth in't: not a month
'Fore your queen died, she was more worth such gazes
Than what you look on now.

LEONTES:
I thought of her,
Even in these looks I made.
But your petition
Is yet unanswer'd. I will to your father:
Your honour not o'erthrown by your desires,
I am friend to them and you: upon which errand
I now go toward him; therefore follow me
And mark what way I make: come, good my lord.

AUTOLYCUS:
Beseech you, sir, were you present at this relation?

First Gentleman:
I was by at the opening of the fardel, heard the old
shepherd deliver the manner how he found it:
whereupon, after a little amazedness, we were all
commanded out of the chamber; only this methought I
heard the shepherd say, he found the child.

AUTOLYCUS:
I would most gladly know the issue of it.

First Gentleman:
I make a broken delivery of the business; but the
changes I perceived in the king and Camillo were
very notes of admiration: they seemed almost, with
staring on one another, to tear the cases of their
eyes; there was speech in their dumbness, language
in their very gesture; they looked as they had heard
of a world ransomed, or one destroyed: a notable
passion of wonder appeared in them; but the wisest
beholder, that knew no more but seeing, could not
say if the importance were joy or sorrow; but in the
extremity of the one, it must needs be.
Here comes a gentleman that haply knows more.
The news, Rogero?

Second Gentleman:
Nothing but bonfires: the oracle is fulfilled; the
king's daughter is found: such a deal of wonder is
broken out within this hour that ballad-makers
cannot be able to express it.
Here comes the Lady Paulina's steward: he can
deliver you more. How goes it now, sir? this news
which is called true is so like an old tale, that
the verity of it is in strong suspicion: has the king
found his heir?

Third Gentleman:
Most true, if ever truth were pregnant by
circumstance: that which you hear you'll swear you
see, there is such unity in the proofs. The mantle
of Queen Hermione's, her jewel about the neck of it,
the letters of Antigonus found with it which they
know to be his character, the majesty of the
creature in resemblance of the mother, the affection
of nobleness which nature shows above her breeding,
and many other evidences proclaim her with all
certainty to be the king's daughter. Did you see
the meeting of the two kings?

Second Gentleman:
No.

Third Gentleman:
Then have you lost a sight, which was to be seen,
cannot be spoken of. There might you have beheld one
joy crown another, so and in such manner that it
seemed sorrow wept to take leave of them, for their
joy waded in tears. There was casting up of eyes,
holding up of hands, with countenances of such
distraction that they were to be known by garment,
not by favour. Our king, being ready to leap out of
himself for joy of his found daughter, as if that
joy were now become a loss, cries 'O, thy mother,
thy mother!' then asks Bohemia forgiveness; then
embraces his son-in-law; then again worries he his
daughter with clipping her; now he thanks the old
shepherd, which stands by like a weather-bitten
conduit of many kings' reigns. I never heard of such
another encounter, which lames report to follow it
and undoes description to do it.

Second Gentleman:
What, pray you, became of Antigonus, that carried
hence the child?

Third Gentleman:
Like an old tale still, which will have matter to
rehearse, though credit be asleep and not an ear
open. He was torn to pieces with a bear: this
avouches the shepherd's son; who has not only his
innocence, which seems much, to justify him, but a
handkerchief and rings of his that Paulina knows.

First Gentleman:
What became of his bark and his followers?

Third Gentleman:
Wrecked the same instant of their master's death and
in the view of the shepherd: so that all the
instruments which aided to expose the child were
even then lost when it was found. But O, the noble
combat that 'twixt joy and sorrow was fought in
Paulina! She had one eye declined for the loss of
her husband, another elevated that the oracle was
fulfilled: she lifted the princess from the earth,
and so locks her in embracing, as if she would pin
her to her heart that she might no more be in danger
of losing.

First Gentleman:
The dignity of this act was worth the audience of
kings and princes; for by such was it acted.

Third Gentleman:
One of the prettiest touches of all and that which
angled for mine eyes, caught the water though not
the fish, was when, at the relation of the queen's
death, with the manner how she came to't bravely
confessed and lamented by the king, how
attentiveness wounded his daughter; till, from one
sign of dolour to another, she did, with an 'Alas,'
I would fain say, bleed tears, for I am sure my
heart wept blood. Who was most marble there changed
colour; some swooned, all sorrowed: if all the world
could have seen 't, the woe had been universal.

First Gentleman:
Are they returned to the court?

Third Gentleman:
No: the princess hearing of her mother's statue,
which is in the keeping of Paulina,--a piece many
years in doing and now newly performed by that rare
Italian master, Julio Romano, who, had he himself
eternity and could put breath into his work, would
beguile Nature of her custom, so perfectly he is her
ape: he so near to Hermione hath done Hermione that
they say one would speak to her and stand in hope of
answer: thither with all greediness of affection
are they gone, and there they intend to sup.

Second Gentleman:
I thought she had some great matter there in hand;
for she hath privately twice or thrice a day, ever
since the death of Hermione, visited that removed
house. Shall we thither and with our company piece
the rejoicing?

First Gentleman:
Who would be thence that has the benefit of access?
every wink of an eye some new grace will be born:
our absence makes us unthrifty to our knowledge.
Let's along.

AUTOLYCUS:
Now, had I not the dash of my former life in me,
would preferment drop on my head. I brought the old
man and his son aboard the prince: told him I heard
them talk of a fardel and I know not what: but he
at that time, overfond of the shepherd's daughter,
so he then took her to be, who began to be much
sea-sick, and himself little better, extremity of
weather continuing, this mystery remained
undiscovered. But 'tis all one to me; for had I
been the finder out of this secret, it would not
have relished among my other discredits.
Here come those I have done good to against my will,
and already appearing in the blossoms of their fortune.

Shepherd:
Come, boy; I am past moe children, but thy sons and
daughters will be all gentlemen born.

Clown:
You are well met, sir. You denied to fight with me
this other day, because I was no gentleman born.
See you these clothes? say you see them not and
think me still no gentleman born: you were best say
these robes are not gentlemen born: give me the
lie, do, and try whether I am not now a gentleman born.

AUTOLYCUS:
I know you are now, sir, a gentleman born.

Clown:
Ay, and have been so any time these four hours.

Shepherd:
And so have I, boy.

Clown:
So you have: but I was a gentleman born before my
father; for the king's son took me by the hand, and
called me brother; and then the two kings called my
father brother; and then the prince my brother and
the princess my sister called my father father; and
so we wept, and there was the first gentleman-like
tears that ever we shed.

Shepherd:
We may live, son, to shed many more.

Clown:
Ay; or else 'twere hard luck, being in so
preposterous estate as we are.

AUTOLYCUS:
I humbly beseech you, sir, to pardon me all the
faults I have committed to your worship and to give
me your good report to the prince my master.

Shepherd:
Prithee, son, do; for we must be gentle, now we are
gentlemen.

Clown:
Thou wilt amend thy life?

AUTOLYCUS:
Ay, an it like your good worship.

Clown:
Give me thy hand: I will swear to the prince thou
art as honest a true fellow as any is in Bohemia.

Shepherd:
You may say it, but not swear it.

Clown:
Not swear it, now I am a gentleman? Let boors and
franklins say it, I'll swear it.

Shepherd:
How if it be false, son?

Clown:
If it be ne'er so false, a true gentleman may swear
it in the behalf of his friend: and I'll swear to
the prince thou art a tall fellow of thy hands and
that thou wilt not be drunk; but I know thou art no
tall fellow of thy hands and that thou wilt be
drunk: but I'll swear it, and I would thou wouldst
be a tall fellow of thy hands.

AUTOLYCUS:
I will prove so, sir, to my power.

Clown:
Ay, by any means prove a tall fellow: if I do not
wonder how thou darest venture to be drunk, not
being a tall fellow, trust me not. Hark! the kings
and the princes, our kindred, are going to see the
queen's picture. Come, follow us: we'll be thy
good masters.

LEONTES:
O grave and good Paulina, the great comfort
That I have had of thee!

PAULINA:
What, sovereign sir,
I did not well I meant well. All my services
You have paid home: but that you have vouchsafed,
With your crown'd brother and these your contracted
Heirs of your kingdoms, my poor house to visit,
It is a surplus of your grace, which never
My life may last to answer.

LEONTES:
O Paulina,
We honour you with trouble: but we came
To see the statue of our queen: your gallery
Have we pass'd through, not without much content
In many singularities; but we saw not
That which my daughter came to look upon,
The statue of her mother.

PAULINA:
As she lived peerless,
So her dead likeness, I do well believe,
Excels whatever yet you look'd upon
Or hand of man hath done; therefore I keep it
Lonely, apart. But here it is: prepare
To see the life as lively mock'd as ever
Still sleep mock'd death: behold, and say 'tis well.
I like your silence, it the more shows off
Your wonder: but yet speak; first, you, my liege,
Comes it not something near?

LEONTES:
Her natural posture!
Chide me, dear stone, that I may say indeed
Thou art Hermione; or rather, thou art she
In thy not chiding, for she was as tender
As infancy and grace. But yet, Paulina,
Hermione was not so much wrinkled, nothing
So aged as this seems.

POLIXENES:
O, not by much.

PAULINA:
So much the more our carver's excellence;
Which lets go by some sixteen years and makes her
As she lived now.

LEONTES:
As now she might have done,
So much to my good comfort, as it is
Now piercing to my soul. O, thus she stood,
Even with such life of majesty, warm life,
As now it coldly stands, when first I woo'd her!
I am ashamed: does not the stone rebuke me
For being more stone than it? O royal piece,
There's magic in thy majesty, which has
My evils conjured to remembrance and
From thy admiring daughter took the spirits,
Standing like stone with thee.

PERDITA:
And give me leave,
And do not say 'tis superstition, that
I kneel and then implore her blessing. Lady,
Dear queen, that ended when I but began,
Give me that hand of yours to kiss.

PAULINA:
O, patience!
The statue is but newly fix'd, the colour's Not dry.

CAMILLO:
My lord, your sorrow was too sore laid on,
Which sixteen winters cannot blow away,
So many summers dry; scarce any joy
Did ever so long live; no sorrow
But kill'd itself much sooner.

POLIXENES:
Dear my brother,
Let him that was the cause of this have power
To take off so much grief from you as he
Will piece up in himself.

PAULINA:
Indeed, my lord,
If I had thought the sight of my poor image
Would thus have wrought you,--for the stone is mine--
I'ld not have show'd it.

LEONTES:
Do not draw the curtain.

PAULINA:
No longer shall you gaze on't, lest your fancy
May think anon it moves.

LEONTES:
Let be, let be.
Would I were dead, but that, methinks, already--
What was he that did make it? See, my lord,
Would you not deem it breathed? and that those veins
Did verily bear blood?

POLIXENES:
Masterly done:
The very life seems warm upon her lip.

LEONTES:
The fixture of her eye has motion in't,
As we are mock'd with art.

PAULINA:
I'll draw the curtain:
My lord's almost so far transported that
He'll think anon it lives.

LEONTES:
O sweet Paulina,
Make me to think so twenty years together!
No settled senses of the world can match
The pleasure of that madness. Let 't alone.

PAULINA:
I am sorry, sir, I have thus far stirr'd you: but
I could afflict you farther.

LEONTES:
Do, Paulina;
For this affliction has a taste as sweet
As any cordial comfort. Still, methinks,
There is an air comes from her: what fine chisel
Could ever yet cut breath? Let no man mock me,
For I will kiss her.

PAULINA:
Good my lord, forbear:
The ruddiness upon her lip is wet;
You'll mar it if you kiss it, stain your own
With oily painting. Shall I draw the curtain?

LEONTES:
No, not these twenty years.

PERDITA:
So long could I
Stand by, a looker on.

PAULINA:
Either forbear,
Quit presently the chapel, or resolve you
For more amazement. If you can behold it,
I'll make the statue move indeed, descend
And take you by the hand; but then you'll think--
Which I protest against--I am assisted
By wicked powers.

LEONTES:
What you can make her do,
I am content to look on: what to speak,
I am content to hear; for 'tis as easy
To make her speak as move.

PAULINA:
It is required
You do awake your faith. Then all stand still;
On: those that think it is unlawful business
I am about, let them depart.

LEONTES:
Proceed:
No foot shall stir.

PAULINA:
Music, awake her; strike!
'Tis time; descend; be stone no more; approach;
Strike all that look upon with marvel. Come,
I'll fill your grave up: stir, nay, come away,
Bequeath to death your numbness, for from him
Dear life redeems you. You perceive she stirs:
Start not; her actions shall be holy as
You hear my spell is lawful: do not shun her
Until you see her die again; for then
You kill her double. Nay, present your hand:
When she was young you woo'd her; now in age
Is she become the suitor?

LEONTES:
O, she's warm!
If this be magic, let it be an art
Lawful as eating.

POLIXENES:
She embraces him.

CAMILLO:
She hangs about his neck:
If she pertain to life let her speak too.

POLIXENES:
Ay, and make't manifest where she has lived,
Or how stolen from the dead.

PAULINA:
That she is living,
Were it but told you, should be hooted at
Like an old tale: but it appears she lives,
Though yet she speak not. Mark a little while.
Please you to interpose, fair madam: kneel
And pray your mother's blessing. Turn, good lady;
Our Perdita is found.

HERMIONE:
You gods, look down
And from your sacred vials pour your graces
Upon my daughter's head! Tell me, mine own.
Where hast thou been preserved? where lived? how found
Thy father's court? for thou shalt hear that I,
Knowing by Paulina that the oracle
Gave hope thou wast in being, have preserved
Myself to see the issue.

PAULINA:
There's time enough for that;
Lest they desire upon this push to trouble
Your joys with like relation. Go together,
You precious winners all; your exultation
Partake to every one. I, an old turtle,
Will wing me to some wither'd bough and there
My mate, that's never to be found again,
Lament till I am lost.

LEONTES:
O, peace, Paulina!
Thou shouldst a husband take by my consent,
As I by thine a wife: this is a match,
And made between's by vows. Thou hast found mine;
But how, is to be question'd; for I saw her,
As I thought, dead, and have in vain said many
A prayer upon her grave. I'll not seek far--
For him, I partly know his mind--to find thee
An honourable husband. Come, Camillo,
And take her by the hand, whose worth and honesty
Is richly noted and here justified
By us, a pair of kings. Let's from this place.
What! look upon my brother: both your pardons,
That e'er I put between your holy looks
My ill suspicion. This is your son-in-law,
And son unto the king, who, heavens directing,
Is troth-plight to your daughter. Good Paulina,
Lead us from hence, where we may leisurely
Each one demand an answer to his part
Perform'd in this wide gap of time since first
We were dissever'd: hastily lead away.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Escalus.

ESCALUS:
My lord.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Of government the properties to unfold,
Would seem in me to affect speech and discourse;
Since I am put to know that your own science
Exceeds, in that, the lists of all advice
My strength can give you: then no more remains,
But that to your sufficiency, as your Worth is able,
And let them work. The nature of our people,
Our city's institutions, and the terms
For common justice, you're as pregnant in
As art and practise hath enriched any
That we remember. There is our commission,
From which we would not have you warp. Call hither,
I say, bid come before us Angelo.
What figure of us think you he will bear?
For you must know, we have with special soul
Elected him our absence to supply,
Lent him our terror, dress'd him with our love,
And given his deputation all the organs
Of our own power: what think you of it?

ESCALUS:
If any in Vienna be of worth
To undergo such ample grace and honour,
It is Lord Angelo.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Look where he comes.

ANGELO:
Always obedient to your grace's will,
I come to know your pleasure.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Angelo,
There is a kind of character in thy life,
That to the observer doth thy history
Fully unfold. Thyself and thy belongings
Are not thine own so proper as to waste
Thyself upon thy virtues, they on thee.
Heaven doth with us as we with torches do,
Not light them for themselves; for if our virtues
Did not go forth of us, 'twere all alike
As if we had them not. Spirits are not finely touch'd
But to fine issues, nor Nature never lends
The smallest scruple of her excellence
But, like a thrifty goddess, she determines
Herself the glory of a creditor,
Both thanks and use. But I do bend my speech
To one that can my part in him advertise;
Hold therefore, Angelo:--
In our remove be thou at full ourself;
Mortality and mercy in Vienna
Live in thy tongue and heart: old Escalus,
Though first in question, is thy secondary.
Take thy commission.

ANGELO:
Now, good my lord,
Let there be some more test made of my metal,
Before so noble and so great a figure
Be stamp'd upon it.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
No more evasion:
We have with a leaven'd and prepared choice
Proceeded to you; therefore take your honours.
Our haste from hence is of so quick condition
That it prefers itself and leaves unquestion'd
Matters of needful value. We shall write to you,
As time and our concernings shall importune,
How it goes with us, and do look to know
What doth befall you here. So, fare you well;
To the hopeful execution do I leave you
Of your commissions.

ANGELO:
Yet give leave, my lord,
That we may bring you something on the way.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
My haste may not admit it;
Nor need you, on mine honour, have to do
With any scruple; your scope is as mine own
So to enforce or qualify the laws
As to your soul seems good. Give me your hand:
I'll privily away. I love the people,
But do not like to stage me to their eyes:
Through it do well, I do not relish well
Their loud applause and Aves vehement;
Nor do I think the man of safe discretion
That does affect it. Once more, fare you well.

ANGELO:
The heavens give safety to your purposes!

ESCALUS:
Lead forth and bring you back in happiness!

DUKE:
I thank you. Fare you well.

ESCALUS:
I shall desire you, sir, to give me leave
To have free speech with you; and it concerns me
To look into the bottom of my place:
A power I have, but of what strength and nature
I am not yet instructed.

ANGELO:
'Tis so with me. Let us withdraw together,
And we may soon our satisfaction have
Touching that point.

ESCALUS:
I'll wait upon your honour.

LUCIO:
If the duke with the other dukes come not to
composition with the King of Hungary, why then all
the dukes fall upon the king.

First Gentleman:
Heaven grant us its peace, but not the King of
Hungary's!

Second Gentleman:
Amen.

LUCIO:
Thou concludest like the sanctimonious pirate, that
went to sea with the Ten Commandments, but scraped
one out of the table.

Second Gentleman:
'Thou shalt not steal'?

LUCIO:
Ay, that he razed.

First Gentleman:
Why, 'twas a commandment to command the captain and
all the rest from their functions: they put forth
to steal. There's not a soldier of us all, that, in
the thanksgiving before meat, do relish the petition
well that prays for peace.

Second Gentleman:
I never heard any soldier dislike it.

LUCIO:
I believe thee; for I think thou never wast where
grace was said.

Second Gentleman:
No? a dozen times at least.

First Gentleman:
What, in metre?

LUCIO:
In any proportion or in any language.

First Gentleman:
I think, or in any religion.

LUCIO:
Ay, why not? Grace is grace, despite of all
controversy: as, for example, thou thyself art a
wicked villain, despite of all grace.

First Gentleman:
Well, there went but a pair of shears between us.

LUCIO:
I grant; as there may between the lists and the
velvet. Thou art the list.

First Gentleman:
And thou the velvet: thou art good velvet; thou'rt
a three-piled piece, I warrant thee: I had as lief
be a list of an English kersey as be piled, as thou
art piled, for a French velvet. Do I speak
feelingly now?

LUCIO:
I think thou dost; and, indeed, with most painful
feeling of thy speech: I will, out of thine own
confession, learn to begin thy health; but, whilst I
live, forget to drink after thee.

First Gentleman:
I think I have done myself wrong, have I not?

Second Gentleman:
Yes, that thou hast, whether thou art tainted or free.

LUCIO:
Behold, behold. where Madam Mitigation comes! I
have purchased as many diseases under her roof as come to--

Second Gentleman:
To what, I pray?

LUCIO:
Judge.

Second Gentleman:
To three thousand dolours a year.

First Gentleman:
Ay, and more.

LUCIO:
A French crown more.

First Gentleman:
Thou art always figuring diseases in me; but thou
art full of error; I am sound.

LUCIO:
Nay, not as one would say, healthy; but so sound as
things that are hollow: thy bones are hollow;
impiety has made a feast of thee.

First Gentleman:
How now! which of your hips has the most profound sciatica?

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
Well, well; there's one yonder arrested and carried
to prison was worth five thousand of you all.

Second Gentleman:
Who's that, I pray thee?

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
Marry, sir, that's Claudio, Signior Claudio.

First Gentleman:
Claudio to prison? 'tis not so.

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
Nay, but I know 'tis so: I saw him arrested, saw
him carried away; and, which is more, within these
three days his head to be chopped off.

LUCIO:
But, after all this fooling, I would not have it so.
Art thou sure of this?

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
I am too sure of it: and it is for getting Madam
Julietta with child.

LUCIO:
Believe me, this may be: he promised to meet me two
hours since, and he was ever precise in
promise-keeping.

Second Gentleman:
Besides, you know, it draws something near to the
speech we had to such a purpose.

First Gentleman:
But, most of all, agreeing with the proclamation.

LUCIO:
Away! let's go learn the truth of it.

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
Thus, what with the war, what with the sweat, what
with the gallows and what with poverty, I am
custom-shrunk.
How now! what's the news with you?

POMPEY:
Yonder man is carried to prison.

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
Well; what has he done?

POMPEY:
A woman.

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
But what's his offence?

POMPEY:
Groping for trouts in a peculiar river.

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
What, is there a maid with child by him?

POMPEY:
No, but there's a woman with maid by him. You have
not heard of the proclamation, have you?

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
What proclamation, man?

POMPEY:
All houses in the suburbs of Vienna must be plucked down.

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
And what shall become of those in the city?

POMPEY:
They shall stand for seed: they had gone down too,
but that a wise burgher put in for them.

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
But shall all our houses of resort in the suburbs be
pulled down?

POMPEY:
To the ground, mistress.

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
Why, here's a change indeed in the commonwealth!
What shall become of me?

POMPEY:
Come; fear you not: good counsellors lack no
clients: though you change your place, you need not
change your trade; I'll be your tapster still.
Courage! there will be pity taken on you: you that
have worn your eyes almost out in the service, you
will be considered.

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
What's to do here, Thomas tapster? let's withdraw.

POMPEY:
Here comes Signior Claudio, led by the provost to
prison; and there's Madam Juliet.

CLAUDIO:
Fellow, why dost thou show me thus to the world?
Bear me to prison, where I am committed.

Provost:
I do it not in evil disposition,
But from Lord Angelo by special charge.

CLAUDIO:
Thus can the demigod Authority
Make us pay down for our offence by weight
The words of heaven; on whom it will, it will;
On whom it will not, so; yet still 'tis just.



--- End of file: shakespear_15.txt ---

LUCIO:
Why, how now, Claudio! whence comes this restraint?

CLAUDIO:
From too much liberty, my Lucio, liberty:
As surfeit is the father of much fast,
So every scope by the immoderate use
Turns to restraint. Our natures do pursue,
Like rats that ravin down their proper bane,
A thirsty evil; and when we drink we die.

LUCIO:
If could speak so wisely under an arrest, I would
send for certain of my creditors: and yet, to say
the truth, I had as lief have the foppery of freedom
as the morality of imprisonment. What's thy
offence, Claudio?

CLAUDIO:
What but to speak of would offend again.

LUCIO:
What, is't murder?

CLAUDIO:
No.

LUCIO:
Lechery?

CLAUDIO:
Call it so.

Provost:
Away, sir! you must go.

CLAUDIO:
One word, good friend. Lucio, a word with you.

LUCIO:
A hundred, if they'll do you any good.
Is lechery so look'd after?

CLAUDIO:
Thus stands it with me: upon a true contract
I got possession of Julietta's bed:
You know the lady; she is fast my wife,
Save that we do the denunciation lack
Of outward order: this we came not to,
Only for propagation of a dower
Remaining in the coffer of her friends,
From whom we thought it meet to hide our love
Till time had made them for us. But it chances
The stealth of our most mutual entertainment
With character too gross is writ on Juliet.

LUCIO:
With child, perhaps?

CLAUDIO:
Unhappily, even so.
And the new deputy now for the duke--
Whether it be the fault and glimpse of newness,
Or whether that the body public be
A horse whereon the governor doth ride,
Who, newly in the seat, that it may know
He can command, lets it straight feel the spur;
Whether the tyranny be in his place,
Or in his emmence that fills it up,
I stagger in:--but this new governor
Awakes me all the enrolled penalties
Which have, like unscour'd armour, hung by the wall
So long that nineteen zodiacs have gone round
And none of them been worn; and, for a name,
Now puts the drowsy and neglected act
Freshly on me: 'tis surely for a name.

LUCIO:
I warrant it is: and thy head stands so tickle on
thy shoulders that a milkmaid, if she be in love,
may sigh it off. Send after the duke and appeal to
him.

CLAUDIO:
I have done so, but he's not to be found.
I prithee, Lucio, do me this kind service:
This day my sister should the cloister enter
And there receive her approbation:
Acquaint her with the danger of my state:
Implore her, in my voice, that she make friends
To the strict deputy; bid herself assay him:
I have great hope in that; for in her youth
There is a prone and speechless dialect,
Such as move men; beside, she hath prosperous art
When she will play with reason and discourse,
And well she can persuade.

LUCIO:
I pray she may; as well for the encouragement of the
like, which else would stand under grievous
imposition, as for the enjoying of thy life, who I
would be sorry should be thus foolishly lost at a
game of tick-tack. I'll to her.

CLAUDIO:
I thank you, good friend Lucio.

LUCIO:
Within two hours.

CLAUDIO:
Come, officer, away!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
No, holy father; throw away that thought;
Believe not that the dribbling dart of love
Can pierce a complete bosom. Why I desire thee
To give me secret harbour, hath a purpose
More grave and wrinkled than the aims and ends
Of burning youth.

FRIAR THOMAS:
May your grace speak of it?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
My holy sir, none better knows than you
How I have ever loved the life removed
And held in idle price to haunt assemblies
Where youth, and cost, and witless bravery keeps.
I have deliver'd to Lord Angelo,
A man of stricture and firm abstinence,
My absolute power and place here in Vienna,
And he supposes me travell'd to Poland;
For so I have strew'd it in the common ear,
And so it is received. Now, pious sir,
You will demand of me why I do this?

FRIAR THOMAS:
Gladly, my lord.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
We have strict statutes and most biting laws.
The needful bits and curbs to headstrong weeds,
Which for this nineteen years we have let slip;
Even like an o'ergrown lion in a cave,
That goes not out to prey. Now, as fond fathers,
Having bound up the threatening twigs of birch,
Only to stick it in their children's sight
For terror, not to use, in time the rod
Becomes more mock'd than fear'd; so our decrees,
Dead to infliction, to themselves are dead;
And liberty plucks justice by the nose;
The baby beats the nurse, and quite athwart
Goes all decorum.

FRIAR THOMAS:
It rested in your grace
To unloose this tied-up justice when you pleased:
And it in you more dreadful would have seem'd
Than in Lord Angelo.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I do fear, too dreadful:
Sith 'twas my fault to give the people scope,
'Twould be my tyranny to strike and gall them
For what I bid them do: for we bid this be done,
When evil deeds have their permissive pass
And not the punishment. Therefore indeed, my father,
I have on Angelo imposed the office;
Who may, in the ambush of my name, strike home,
And yet my nature never in the fight
To do in slander. And to behold his sway,
I will, as 'twere a brother of your order,
Visit both prince and people: therefore, I prithee,
Supply me with the habit and instruct me
How I may formally in person bear me
Like a true friar. More reasons for this action
At our more leisure shall I render you;
Only, this one: Lord Angelo is precise;
Stands at a guard with envy; scarce confesses
That his blood flows, or that his appetite
Is more to bread than stone: hence shall we see,
If power change purpose, what our seemers be.

ISABELLA:
And have you nuns no farther privileges?

FRANCISCA:
Are not these large enough?

ISABELLA:
Yes, truly; I speak not as desiring more;
But rather wishing a more strict restraint
Upon the sisterhood, the votarists of Saint Clare.

LUCIO:

ISABELLA:
Who's that which calls?

FRANCISCA:
It is a man's voice. Gentle Isabella,
Turn you the key, and know his business of him;
You may, I may not; you are yet unsworn.
When you have vow'd, you must not speak with men
But in the presence of the prioress:
Then, if you speak, you must not show your face,
Or, if you show your face, you must not speak.
He calls again; I pray you, answer him.

ISABELLA:
Peace and prosperity! Who is't that calls

LUCIO:
Hail, virgin, if you be, as those cheek-roses
Proclaim you are no less! Can you so stead me
As bring me to the sight of Isabella,
A novice of this place and the fair sister
To her unhappy brother Claudio?

ISABELLA:
Why 'her unhappy brother'? let me ask,
The rather for I now must make you know
I am that Isabella and his sister.

LUCIO:
Gentle and fair, your brother kindly greets you:
Not to be weary with you, he's in prison.

ISABELLA:
Woe me! for what?

LUCIO:
For that which, if myself might be his judge,
He should receive his punishment in thanks:
He hath got his friend with child.

ISABELLA:
Sir, make me not your story.

LUCIO:
It is true.
I would not--though 'tis my familiar sin
With maids to seem the lapwing and to jest,
Tongue far from heart--play with all virgins so:
I hold you as a thing ensky'd and sainted.
By your renouncement an immortal spirit,
And to be talk'd with in sincerity,
As with a saint.

ISABELLA:
You do blaspheme the good in mocking me.

LUCIO:
Do not believe it. Fewness and truth, 'tis thus:
Your brother and his lover have embraced:
As those that feed grow full, as blossoming time
That from the seedness the bare fallow brings
To teeming foison, even so her plenteous womb
Expresseth his full tilth and husbandry.

ISABELLA:
Some one with child by him? My cousin Juliet?

LUCIO:
Is she your cousin?

ISABELLA:
Adoptedly; as school-maids change their names
By vain though apt affection.

LUCIO:
She it is.

ISABELLA:
O, let him marry her.

LUCIO:
This is the point.
The duke is very strangely gone from hence;
Bore many gentlemen, myself being one,
In hand and hope of action: but we do learn
By those that know the very nerves of state,
His givings-out were of an infinite distance
From his true-meant design. Upon his place,
And with full line of his authority,
Governs Lord Angelo; a man whose blood
Is very snow-broth; one who never feels
The wanton stings and motions of the sense,
But doth rebate and blunt his natural edge
With profits of the mind, study and fast.
He--to give fear to use and liberty,
Which have for long run by the hideous law,
As mice by lions--hath pick'd out an act,
Under whose heavy sense your brother's life
Falls into forfeit: he arrests him on it;
And follows close the rigour of the statute,
To make him an example. All hope is gone,
Unless you have the grace by your fair prayer
To soften Angelo: and that's my pith of business
'Twixt you and your poor brother.

ISABELLA:
Doth he so seek his life?

LUCIO:
Has censured him
Already; and, as I hear, the provost hath
A warrant for his execution.

ISABELLA:
Alas! what poor ability's in me
To do him good?

LUCIO:
Assay the power you have.

ISABELLA:
My power? Alas, I doubt--

LUCIO:
Our doubts are traitors
And make us lose the good we oft might win
By fearing to attempt. Go to Lord Angelo,
And let him learn to know, when maidens sue,
Men give like gods; but when they weep and kneel,
All their petitions are as freely theirs
As they themselves would owe them.

ISABELLA:
I'll see what I can do.

LUCIO:
But speedily.

ISABELLA:
I will about it straight;
No longer staying but to give the mother
Notice of my affair. I humbly thank you:
Commend me to my brother: soon at night
I'll send him certain word of my success.

LUCIO:
I take my leave of you.

ISABELLA:
Good sir, adieu.

ANGELO:
We must not make a scarecrow of the law,
Setting it up to fear the birds of prey,
And let it keep one shape, till custom make it
Their perch and not their terror.

ESCALUS:
Ay, but yet
Let us be keen, and rather cut a little,
Than fall, and bruise to death. Alas, this gentleman
Whom I would save, had a most noble father!
Let but your honour know,
Whom I believe to be most strait in virtue,
That, in the working of your own affections,
Had time cohered with place or place with wishing,
Or that the resolute acting of your blood
Could have attain'd the effect of your own purpose,
Whether you had not sometime in your life
Err'd in this point which now you censure him,
And pull'd the law upon you.

ANGELO:
'Tis one thing to be tempted, Escalus,
Another thing to fall. I not deny,
The jury, passing on the prisoner's life,
May in the sworn twelve have a thief or two
Guiltier than him they try. What's open made to justice,
That justice seizes: what know the laws
That thieves do pass on thieves? 'Tis very pregnant,
The jewel that we find, we stoop and take't
Because we see it; but what we do not see
We tread upon, and never think of it.
You may not so extenuate his offence
For I have had such faults; but rather tell me,
When I, that censure him, do so offend,
Let mine own judgment pattern out my death,
And nothing come in partial. Sir, he must die.

ESCALUS:
Be it as your wisdom will.

ANGELO:
Where is the provost?

Provost:
Here, if it like your honour.

ANGELO:
See that Claudio
Be executed by nine to-morrow morning:
Bring him his confessor, let him be prepared;
For that's the utmost of his pilgrimage.

ESCALUS:

ELBOW:
Come, bring them away: if these be good people in
a commonweal that do nothing but use their abuses in
common houses, I know no law: bring them away.

ANGELO:
How now, sir! What's your name? and what's the matter?

ELBOW:
If it Please your honour, I am the poor duke's
constable, and my name is Elbow: I do lean upon
justice, sir, and do bring in here before your good
honour two notorious benefactors.

ANGELO:
Benefactors? Well; what benefactors are they? are
they not malefactors?

ELBOW:
If it? please your honour, I know not well what they
are: but precise villains they are, that I am sure
of; and void of all profanation in the world that
good Christians ought to have.

ESCALUS:
This comes off well; here's a wise officer.

ANGELO:
Go to: what quality are they of? Elbow is your
name? why dost thou not speak, Elbow?

POMPEY:
He cannot, sir; he's out at elbow.

ANGELO:
What are you, sir?

ELBOW:
He, sir! a tapster, sir; parcel-bawd; one that
serves a bad woman; whose house, sir, was, as they
say, plucked down in the suburbs; and now she
professes a hot-house, which, I think, is a very ill house too.

ESCALUS:
How know you that?

ELBOW:
My wife, sir, whom I detest before heaven and your honour,--

ESCALUS:
How? thy wife?

ELBOW:
Ay, sir; whom, I thank heaven, is an honest woman,--

ESCALUS:
Dost thou detest her therefore?

ELBOW:
I say, sir, I will detest myself also, as well as
she, that this house, if it be not a bawd's house,
it is pity of her life, for it is a naughty house.

ESCALUS:
How dost thou know that, constable?

ELBOW:
Marry, sir, by my wife; who, if she had been a woman
cardinally given, might have been accused in
fornication, adultery, and all uncleanliness there.

ESCALUS:
By the woman's means?

ELBOW:
Ay, sir, by Mistress Overdone's means: but as she
spit in his face, so she defied him.

POMPEY:
Sir, if it please your honour, this is not so.

ELBOW:
Prove it before these varlets here, thou honourable
man; prove it.

ESCALUS:
Do you hear how he misplaces?

POMPEY:
Sir, she came in great with child; and longing,
saving your honour's reverence, for stewed prunes;
sir, we had but two in the house, which at that very
distant time stood, as it were, in a fruit-dish, a
dish of some three-pence; your honours have seen
such dishes; they are not China dishes, but very
good dishes,--

ESCALUS:
Go to, go to: no matter for the dish, sir.

POMPEY:
No, indeed, sir, not of a pin; you are therein in
the right: but to the point. As I say, this
Mistress Elbow, being, as I say, with child, and
being great-bellied, and longing, as I said, for
prunes; and having but two in the dish, as I said,
Master Froth here, this very man, having eaten the
rest, as I said, and, as I say, paying for them very
honestly; for, as you know, Master Froth, I could
not give you three-pence again.

FROTH:
No, indeed.

POMPEY:
Very well: you being then, if you be remembered,
cracking the stones of the foresaid prunes,--

FROTH:
Ay, so I did indeed.

POMPEY:
Why, very well; I telling you then, if you be
remembered, that such a one and such a one were past
cure of the thing you wot of, unless they kept very
good diet, as I told you,--

FROTH:
All this is true.

POMPEY:
Why, very well, then,--

ESCALUS:
Come, you are a tedious fool: to the purpose. What
was done to Elbow's wife, that he hath cause to
complain of? Come me to what was done to her.

POMPEY:
Sir, your honour cannot come to that yet.

ESCALUS:
No, sir, nor I mean it not.

POMPEY:
Sir, but you shall come to it, by your honour's
leave. And, I beseech you, look into Master Froth
here, sir; a man of four-score pound a year; whose
father died at Hallowmas: was't not at Hallowmas,
Master Froth?

FROTH:
All-hallond eve.

POMPEY:
Why, very well; I hope here be truths. He, sir,
sitting, as I say, in a lower chair, sir; 'twas in
the Bunch of Grapes, where indeed you have a delight
to sit, have you not?

FROTH:
I have so; because it is an open room and good for winter.

POMPEY:
Why, very well, then; I hope here be truths.

ANGELO:
This will last out a night in Russia,
When nights are longest there: I'll take my leave.
And leave you to the hearing of the cause;
Hoping you'll find good cause to whip them all.

ESCALUS:
I think no less. Good morrow to your lordship.
Now, sir, come on: what was done to Elbow's wife, once more?

POMPEY:
Once, sir? there was nothing done to her once.

ELBOW:
I beseech you, sir, ask him what this man did to my wife.

POMPEY:
I beseech your honour, ask me.

ESCALUS:
Well, sir; what did this gentleman to her?

POMPEY:
I beseech you, sir, look in this gentleman's face.
Good Master Froth, look upon his honour; 'tis for a
good purpose. Doth your honour mark his face?

ESCALUS:
Ay, sir, very well.

POMPEY:
Nay; I beseech you, mark it well.

ESCALUS:
Well, I do so.

POMPEY:
Doth your honour see any harm in his face?

ESCALUS:
Why, no.

POMPEY:
I'll be supposed upon a book, his face is the worst
thing about him. Good, then; if his face be the
worst thing about him, how could Master Froth do the
constable's wife any harm? I would know that of
your honour.

ESCALUS:
He's in the right. Constable, what say you to it?

ELBOW:
First, an it like you, the house is a respected
house; next, this is a respected fellow; and his
mistress is a respected woman.

POMPEY:
By this hand, sir, his wife is a more respected
person than any of us all.

ELBOW:
Varlet, thou liest; thou liest, wicked varlet! the
time has yet to come that she was ever respected
with man, woman, or child.

POMPEY:
Sir, she was respected with him before he married with her.

ESCALUS:
Which is the wiser here? Justice or Iniquity? Is
this true?

ELBOW:
O thou caitiff! O thou varlet! O thou wicked
Hannibal! I respected with her before I was married
to her! If ever I was respected with her, or she
with me, let not your worship think me the poor
duke's officer. Prove this, thou wicked Hannibal, or
I'll have mine action of battery on thee.

ESCALUS:
If he took you a box o' the ear, you might have your
action of slander too.

ELBOW:
Marry, I thank your good worship for it. What is't
your worship's pleasure I shall do with this wicked caitiff?

ESCALUS:
Truly, officer, because he hath some offences in him
that thou wouldst discover if thou couldst, let him
continue in his courses till thou knowest what they
are.

ELBOW:
Marry, I thank your worship for it. Thou seest, thou
wicked varlet, now, what's come upon thee: thou art
to continue now, thou varlet; thou art to continue.

ESCALUS:
Where were you born, friend?

FROTH:
Here in Vienna, sir.

ESCALUS:
Are you of fourscore pounds a year?

FROTH:
Yes, an't please you, sir.

ESCALUS:
So. What trade are you of, sir?

POMPHEY:
Tapster; a poor widow's tapster.

ESCALUS:
Your mistress' name?

POMPHEY:
Mistress Overdone.

ESCALUS:
Hath she had any more than one husband?

POMPEY:
Nine, sir; Overdone by the last.

ESCALUS:
Nine! Come hither to me, Master Froth. Master
Froth, I would not have you acquainted with
tapsters: they will draw you, Master Froth, and you
will hang them. Get you gone, and let me hear no
more of you.

FROTH:
I thank your worship. For mine own part, I never
come into any room in a tap-house, but I am drawn
in.

ESCALUS:
Well, no more of it, Master Froth: farewell.
Come you hither to me, Master tapster. What's your
name, Master tapster?

POMPEY:
Pompey.

ESCALUS:
What else?

POMPEY:
Bum, sir.

ESCALUS:
Troth, and your bum is the greatest thing about you;
so that in the beastliest sense you are Pompey the
Great. Pompey, you are partly a bawd, Pompey,
howsoever you colour it in being a tapster, are you
not? come, tell me true: it shall be the better for you.

POMPEY:
Truly, sir, I am a poor fellow that would live.

ESCALUS:
How would you live, Pompey? by being a bawd? What
do you think of the trade, Pompey? is it a lawful trade?

POMPEY:
If the law would allow it, sir.

ESCALUS:
But the law will not allow it, Pompey; nor it shall
not be allowed in Vienna.

POMPEY:
Does your worship mean to geld and splay all the
youth of the city?

ESCALUS:
No, Pompey.

POMPEY:
Truly, sir, in my poor opinion, they will to't then.
If your worship will take order for the drabs and
the knaves, you need not to fear the bawds.

ESCALUS:
There are pretty orders beginning, I can tell you:
it is but heading and hanging.

POMPEY:
If you head and hang all that offend that way but
for ten year together, you'll be glad to give out a
commission for more heads: if this law hold in
Vienna ten year, I'll rent the fairest house in it
after three-pence a bay: if you live to see this
come to pass, say Pompey told you so.

ESCALUS:
Thank you, good Pompey; and, in requital of your
prophecy, hark you: I advise you, let me not find
you before me again upon any complaint whatsoever;
no, not for dwelling where you do: if I do, Pompey,
I shall beat you to your tent, and prove a shrewd
Caesar to you; in plain dealing, Pompey, I shall
have you whipt: so, for this time, Pompey, fare you well.

POMPEY:
I thank your worship for your good counsel:
but I shall follow it as the flesh and fortune shall
better determine.
Whip me? No, no; let carman whip his jade:
The valiant heart is not whipt out of his trade.

ESCALUS:
Come hither to me, Master Elbow; come hither, Master
constable. How long have you been in this place of constable?

ELBOW:
Seven year and a half, sir.

ESCALUS:
I thought, by your readiness in the office, you had
continued in it some time. You say, seven years together?

ELBOW:
And a half, sir.

ESCALUS:
Alas, it hath been great pains to you. They do you
wrong to put you so oft upon 't: are there not men
in your ward sufficient to serve it?

ELBOW:
Faith, sir, few of any wit in such matters: as they
are chosen, they are glad to choose me for them; I
do it for some piece of money, and go through with
all.

ESCALUS:
Look you bring me in the names of some six or seven,
the most sufficient of your parish.

ELBOW:
To your worship's house, sir?

ESCALUS:
To my house. Fare you well.
What's o'clock, think you?

Justice:
Eleven, sir.

ESCALUS:
I pray you home to dinner with me.

Justice:
I humbly thank you.

ESCALUS:
It grieves me for the death of Claudio;
But there's no remedy.

Justice:
Lord Angelo is severe.

ESCALUS:
It is but needful:
Mercy is not itself, that oft looks so;
Pardon is still the nurse of second woe:
But yet,--poor Claudio! There is no remedy.
Come, sir.

Servant:
He's hearing of a cause; he will come straight
I'll tell him of you.

Provost:
Pray you, do.
I'll know
His pleasure; may be he will relent. Alas,
He hath but as offended in a dream!
All sects, all ages smack of this vice; and he
To die for't!

ANGELO:
Now, what's the matter. Provost?

Provost:
Is it your will Claudio shall die tomorrow?

ANGELO:
Did not I tell thee yea? hadst thou not order?
Why dost thou ask again?

Provost:
Lest I might be too rash:
Under your good correction, I have seen,
When, after execution, judgment hath
Repented o'er his doom.

ANGELO:
Go to; let that be mine:
Do you your office, or give up your place,
And you shall well be spared.

Provost:
I crave your honour's pardon.
What shall be done, sir, with the groaning Juliet?
She's very near her hour.

ANGELO:
Dispose of her
To some more fitter place, and that with speed.

Servant:
Here is the sister of the man condemn'd
Desires access to you.

ANGELO:
Hath he a sister?

Provost:
Ay, my good lord; a very virtuous maid,
And to be shortly of a sisterhood,
If not already.

ANGELO:
Well, let her be admitted.
See you the fornicatress be removed:
Let have needful, but not lavish, means;
There shall be order for't.

Provost:
God save your honour!

ANGELO:
Stay a little while.
You're welcome: what's your will?

ISABELLA:
I am a woeful suitor to your honour,
Please but your honour hear me.

ANGELO:
Well; what's your suit?

ISABELLA:
There is a vice that most I do abhor,
And most desire should meet the blow of justice;
For which I would not plead, but that I must;
For which I must not plead, but that I am
At war 'twixt will and will not.

ANGELO:
Well; the matter?

ISABELLA:
I have a brother is condemn'd to die:
I do beseech you, let it be his fault,
And not my brother.

Provost:

ANGELO:
Condemn the fault and not the actor of it?
Why, every fault's condemn'd ere it be done:
Mine were the very cipher of a function,
To fine the faults whose fine stands in record,
And let go by the actor.

ISABELLA:
O just but severe law!
I had a brother, then. Heaven keep your honour!

LUCIO:

ISABELLA:
Must he needs die?

ANGELO:
Maiden, no remedy.

ISABELLA:
Yes; I do think that you might pardon him,
And neither heaven nor man grieve at the mercy.

ANGELO:
I will not do't.

ISABELLA:
But can you, if you would?

ANGELO:
Look, what I will not, that I cannot do.

ISABELLA:
But might you do't, and do the world no wrong,
If so your heart were touch'd with that remorse
As mine is to him?

ANGELO:
He's sentenced; 'tis too late.

LUCIO:

ISABELLA:
Too late? why, no; I, that do speak a word.
May call it back again. Well, believe this,
No ceremony that to great ones 'longs,
Not the king's crown, nor the deputed sword,
The marshal's truncheon, nor the judge's robe,
Become them with one half so good a grace
As mercy does.
If he had been as you and you as he,
You would have slipt like him; but he, like you,
Would not have been so stern.

ANGELO:
Pray you, be gone.

ISABELLA:
I would to heaven I had your potency,
And you were Isabel! should it then be thus?
No; I would tell what 'twere to be a judge,
And what a prisoner.

LUCIO:

ANGELO:
Your brother is a forfeit of the law,
And you but waste your words.

ISABELLA:
Alas, alas!
Why, all the souls that were were forfeit once;
And He that might the vantage best have took
Found out the remedy. How would you be,
If He, which is the top of judgment, should
But judge you as you are? O, think on that;
And mercy then will breathe within your lips,
Like man new made.

ANGELO:
Be you content, fair maid;
It is the law, not I condemn your brother:
Were he my kinsman, brother, or my son,
It should be thus with him: he must die tomorrow.

ISABELLA:
To-morrow! O, that's sudden! Spare him, spare him!
He's not prepared for death. Even for our kitchens
We kill the fowl of season: shall we serve heaven
With less respect than we do minister
To our gross selves? Good, good my lord, bethink you;
Who is it that hath died for this offence?
There's many have committed it.

LUCIO:

ANGELO:
The law hath not been dead, though it hath slept:
Those many had not dared to do that evil,
If the first that did the edict infringe
Had answer'd for his deed: now 'tis awake
Takes note of what is done; and, like a prophet,
Looks in a glass, that shows what future evils,
Either new, or by remissness new-conceived,
And so in progress to be hatch'd and born,
Are now to have no successive degrees,
But, ere they live, to end.

ISABELLA:
Yet show some pity.

ANGELO:
I show it most of all when I show justice;
For then I pity those I do not know,
Which a dismiss'd offence would after gall;
And do him right that, answering one foul wrong,
Lives not to act another. Be satisfied;
Your brother dies to-morrow; be content.

ISABELLA:
So you must be the first that gives this sentence,
And he, that suffer's. O, it is excellent
To have a giant's strength; but it is tyrannous
To use it like a giant.

LUCIO:

ISABELLA:
Could great men thunder
As Jove himself does, Jove would ne'er be quiet,
For every pelting, petty officer
Would use his heaven for thunder;
Nothing but thunder! Merciful Heaven,
Thou rather with thy sharp and sulphurous bolt
Split'st the unwedgeable and gnarled oak
Than the soft myrtle: but man, proud man,
Drest in a little brief authority,
Most ignorant of what he's most assured,
His glassy essence, like an angry ape,
Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven
As make the angels weep; who, with our spleens,
Would all themselves laugh mortal.

LUCIO:

Provost:

ISABELLA:
We cannot weigh our brother with ourself:
Great men may jest with saints; 'tis wit in them,
But in the less foul profanation.

LUCIO:
Thou'rt i' the right, girl; more o, that.

ISABELLA:
That in the captain's but a choleric word,
Which in the soldier is flat blasphemy.

LUCIO:

ANGELO:
Why do you put these sayings upon me?

ISABELLA:
Because authority, though it err like others,
Hath yet a kind of medicine in itself,
That skins the vice o' the top. Go to your bosom;
Knock there, and ask your heart what it doth know
That's like my brother's fault: if it confess
A natural guiltiness such as is his,
Let it not sound a thought upon your tongue
Against my brother's life.

ANGELO:

ISABELLA:
Gentle my lord, turn back.

ANGELO:
I will bethink me: come again tomorrow.

ISABELLA:
Hark how I'll bribe you: good my lord, turn back.

ANGELO:
How! bribe me?

ISABELLA:
Ay, with such gifts that heaven shall share with you.

LUCIO:

ISABELLA:
Not with fond shekels of the tested gold,
Or stones whose rates are either rich or poor
As fancy values them; but with true prayers
That shall be up at heaven and enter there
Ere sun-rise, prayers from preserved souls,
From fasting maids whose minds are dedicate
To nothing temporal.

ANGELO:
Well; come to me to-morrow.

LUCIO:

ISABELLA:
Heaven keep your honour safe!

ANGELO:

ISABELLA:
At what hour to-morrow
Shall I attend your lordship?

ANGELO:
At any time 'fore noon.

ISABELLA:
'Save your honour!

ANGELO:
From thee, even from thy virtue!
What's this, what's this? Is this her fault or mine?
The tempter or the tempted, who sins most?
Ha!
Not she: nor doth she tempt: but it is I
That, lying by the violet in the sun,
Do as the carrion does, not as the flower,
Corrupt with virtuous season. Can it be
That modesty may more betray our sense
Than woman's lightness? Having waste ground enough,
Shall we desire to raze the sanctuary
And pitch our evils there? O, fie, fie, fie!
What dost thou, or what art thou, Angelo?
Dost thou desire her foully for those things
That make her good? O, let her brother live!
Thieves for their robbery have authority
When judges steal themselves. What, do I love her,
That I desire to hear her speak again,
And feast upon her eyes? What is't I dream on?
O cunning enemy, that, to catch a saint,
With saints dost bait thy hook! Most dangerous
Is that temptation that doth goad us on
To sin in loving virtue: never could the strumpet,
With all her double vigour, art and nature,
Once stir my temper; but this virtuous maid
Subdues me quite. Even till now,
When men were fond, I smiled and wonder'd how.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Hail to you, provost! so I think you are.

Provost:
I am the provost. What's your will, good friar?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Bound by my charity and my blest order,
I come to visit the afflicted spirits
Here in the prison. Do me the common right
To let me see them and to make me know
The nature of their crimes, that I may minister
To them accordingly.

Provost:
I would do more than that, if more were needful.
Look, here comes one: a gentlewoman of mine,
Who, falling in the flaws of her own youth,
Hath blister'd her report: she is with child;
And he that got it, sentenced; a young man
More fit to do another such offence
Than die for this.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
When must he die?

Provost:
As I do think, to-morrow.
I have provided for you: stay awhile,
And you shall be conducted.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Repent you, fair one, of the sin you carry?

JULIET:
I do; and bear the shame most patiently.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I'll teach you how you shall arraign your conscience,
And try your penitence, if it be sound,
Or hollowly put on.

JULIET:
I'll gladly learn.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Love you the man that wrong'd you?

JULIET:
Yes, as I love the woman that wrong'd him.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
So then it seems your most offenceful act
Was mutually committed?

JULIET:
Mutually.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Then was your sin of heavier kind than his.

JULIET:
I do confess it, and repent it, father.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
'Tis meet so, daughter: but lest you do repent,
As that the sin hath brought you to this shame,
Which sorrow is always towards ourselves, not heaven,
Showing we would not spare heaven as we love it,
But as we stand in fear,--

JULIET:
I do repent me, as it is an evil,
And take the shame with joy.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
There rest.
Your partner, as I hear, must die to-morrow,
And I am going with instruction to him.
Grace go with you, Benedicite!

JULIET:
Must die to-morrow! O injurious love,
That respites me a life, whose very comfort
Is still a dying horror!

Provost:
'Tis pity of him.

ANGELO:
When I would pray and think, I think and pray
To several subjects. Heaven hath my empty words;
Whilst my invention, hearing not my tongue,
Anchors on Isabel: Heaven in my mouth,
As if I did but only chew his name;
And in my heart the strong and swelling evil
Of my conception. The state, whereon I studied
Is like a good thing, being often read,
Grown fear'd and tedious; yea, my gravity,
Wherein--let no man hear me--I take pride,
Could I with boot change for an idle plume,
Which the air beats for vain. O place, O form,
How often dost thou with thy case, thy habit,
Wrench awe from fools and tie the wiser souls
To thy false seeming! Blood, thou art blood:
Let's write good angel on the devil's horn:
'Tis not the devil's crest.
How now! who's there?

Servant:
One Isabel, a sister, desires access to you.

ANGELO:
Teach her the way.
O heavens!
Why does my blood thus muster to my heart,
Making both it unable for itself,
And dispossessing all my other parts
Of necessary fitness?
So play the foolish throngs with one that swoons;
Come all to help him, and so stop the air
By which he should revive: and even so
The general, subject to a well-wish'd king,
Quit their own part, and in obsequious fondness
Crowd to his presence, where their untaught love
Must needs appear offence.
How now, fair maid?

ISABELLA:
I am come to know your pleasure.

ANGELO:
That you might know it, would much better please me
Than to demand what 'tis. Your brother cannot live.

ISABELLA:
Even so. Heaven keep your honour!

ANGELO:
Yet may he live awhile; and, it may be,
As long as you or I yet he must die.

ISABELLA:
Under your sentence?

ANGELO:
Yea.

ISABELLA:
When, I beseech you? that in his reprieve,
Longer or shorter, he may be so fitted
That his soul sicken not.

ANGELO:
Ha! fie, these filthy vices! It were as good
To pardon him that hath from nature stolen
A man already made, as to remit
Their saucy sweetness that do coin heaven's image
In stamps that are forbid: 'tis all as easy
Falsely to take away a life true made
As to put metal in restrained means
To make a false one.

ISABELLA:
'Tis set down so in heaven, but not in earth.

ANGELO:
Say you so? then I shall pose you quickly.
Which had you rather, that the most just law
Now took your brother's life; or, to redeem him,
Give up your body to such sweet uncleanness
As she that he hath stain'd?

ISABELLA:
Sir, believe this,
I had rather give my body than my soul.

ANGELO:
I talk not of your soul: our compell'd sins
Stand more for number than for accompt.

ISABELLA:
How say you?

ANGELO:
Nay, I'll not warrant that; for I can speak
Against the thing I say. Answer to this:
I, now the voice of the recorded law,
Pronounce a sentence on your brother's life:
Might there not be a charity in sin
To save this brother's life?

ISABELLA:
Please you to do't,
I'll take it as a peril to my soul,
It is no sin at all, but charity.

ANGELO:
Pleased you to do't at peril of your soul,
Were equal poise of sin and charity.

ISABELLA:
That I do beg his life, if it be sin,
Heaven let me bear it! you granting of my suit,
If that be sin, I'll make it my morn prayer
To have it added to the faults of mine,
And nothing of your answer.

ANGELO:
Nay, but hear me.
Your sense pursues not mine: either you are ignorant,
Or seem so craftily; and that's not good.

ISABELLA:
Let me be ignorant, and in nothing good,
But graciously to know I am no better.

ANGELO:
Thus wisdom wishes to appear most bright
When it doth tax itself; as these black masks
Proclaim an enshield beauty ten times louder
Than beauty could, display'd. But mark me;
To be received plain, I'll speak more gross:
Your brother is to die.

ISABELLA:
So.

ANGELO:
And his offence is so, as it appears,
Accountant to the law upon that pain.

ISABELLA:
True.

ANGELO:
Admit no other way to save his life,--
As I subscribe not that, nor any other,
But in the loss of question,--that you, his sister,
Finding yourself desired of such a person,
Whose credit with the judge, or own great place,
Could fetch your brother from the manacles
Of the all-building law; and that there were
No earthly mean to save him, but that either
You must lay down the treasures of your body
To this supposed, or else to let him suffer;
What would you do?

ISABELLA:
As much for my poor brother as myself:
That is, were I under the terms of death,
The impression of keen whips I'ld wear as rubies,
And strip myself to death, as to a bed
That longing have been sick for, ere I'ld yield
My body up to shame.

ANGELO:
Then must your brother die.

ISABELLA:
And 'twere the cheaper way:
Better it were a brother died at once,
Than that a sister, by redeeming him,
Should die for ever.

ANGELO:
Were not you then as cruel as the sentence
That you have slander'd so?

ISABELLA:
Ignomy in ransom and free pardon
Are of two houses: lawful mercy
Is nothing kin to foul redemption.

ANGELO:
You seem'd of late to make the law a tyrant;
And rather proved the sliding of your brother
A merriment than a vice.

ISABELLA:
O, pardon me, my lord; it oft falls out,
To have what we would have, we speak not what we mean:
I something do excuse the thing I hate,
For his advantage that I dearly love.

ANGELO:
We are all frail.

ISABELLA:
Else let my brother die,
If not a feodary, but only he
Owe and succeed thy weakness.

ANGELO:
Nay, women are frail too.

ISABELLA:
Ay, as the glasses where they view themselves;
Which are as easy broke as they make forms.
Women! Help Heaven! men their creation mar
In profiting by them. Nay, call us ten times frail;
For we are soft as our complexions are,
And credulous to false prints.

ANGELO:
I think it well:
And from this testimony of your own sex,--
Since I suppose we are made to be no stronger
Than faults may shake our frames,--let me be bold;
I do arrest your words. Be that you are,
That is, a woman; if you be more, you're none;
If you be one, as you are well express'd
By all external warrants, show it now,
By putting on the destined livery.

ISABELLA:
I have no tongue but one: gentle my lord,
Let me entreat you speak the former language.

ANGELO:
Plainly conceive, I love you.

ISABELLA:
My brother did love Juliet,
And you tell me that he shall die for it.

ANGELO:
He shall not, Isabel, if you give me love.

ISABELLA:
I know your virtue hath a licence in't,
Which seems a little fouler than it is,
To pluck on others.

ANGELO:
Believe me, on mine honour,
My words express my purpose.

ISABELLA:
Ha! little honour to be much believed,
And most pernicious purpose! Seeming, seeming!
I will proclaim thee, Angelo; look for't:
Sign me a present pardon for my brother,
Or with an outstretch'd throat I'll tell the world aloud
What man thou art.

ANGELO:
Who will believe thee, Isabel?
My unsoil'd name, the austereness of my life,
My vouch against you, and my place i' the state,
Will so your accusation overweigh,
That you shall stifle in your own report
And smell of calumny. I have begun,
And now I give my sensual race the rein:
Fit thy consent to my sharp appetite;
Lay by all nicety and prolixious blushes,
That banish what they sue for; redeem thy brother
By yielding up thy body to my will;
Or else he must not only die the death,
But thy unkindness shall his death draw out
To lingering sufferance. Answer me to-morrow,
Or, by the affection that now guides me most,
I'll prove a tyrant to him. As for you,
Say what you can, my false o'erweighs your true.

ISABELLA:
To whom should I complain? Did I tell this,
Who would believe me? O perilous mouths,
That bear in them one and the self-same tongue,
Either of condemnation or approof;
Bidding the law make court'sy to their will:
Hooking both right and wrong to the appetite,
To follow as it draws! I'll to my brother:
Though he hath fallen by prompture of the blood,
Yet hath he in him such a mind of honour.
That, had he twenty heads to tender down
On twenty bloody blocks, he'ld yield them up,
Before his sister should her body stoop
To such abhorr'd pollution.
Then, Isabel, live chaste, and, brother, die:
More than our brother is our chastity.
I'll tell him yet of Angelo's request,
And fit his mind to death, for his soul's rest.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
So then you hope of pardon from Lord Angelo?

CLAUDIO:
The miserable have no other medicine
But only hope:
I've hope to live, and am prepared to die.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Be absolute for death; either death or life
Shall thereby be the sweeter. Reason thus with life:
If I do lose thee, I do lose a thing
That none but fools would keep: a breath thou art,
Servile to all the skyey influences,
That dost this habitation, where thou keep'st,
Hourly afflict: merely, thou art death's fool;
For him thou labour'st by thy flight to shun
And yet runn'st toward him still. Thou art not noble;
For all the accommodations that thou bear'st
Are nursed by baseness. Thou'rt by no means valiant;
For thou dost fear the soft and tender fork
Of a poor worm. Thy best of rest is sleep,
And that thou oft provokest; yet grossly fear'st
Thy death, which is no more. Thou art not thyself;
For thou exist'st on many a thousand grains
That issue out of dust. Happy thou art not;
For what thou hast not, still thou strivest to get,
And what thou hast, forget'st. Thou art not certain;
For thy complexion shifts to strange effects,
After the moon. If thou art rich, thou'rt poor;
For, like an ass whose back with ingots bows,
Thou bear's thy heavy riches but a journey,
And death unloads thee. Friend hast thou none;
For thine own bowels, which do call thee sire,
The mere effusion of thy proper loins,
Do curse the gout, serpigo, and the rheum,
For ending thee no sooner. Thou hast nor youth nor age,
But, as it were, an after-dinner's sleep,
Dreaming on both; for all thy blessed youth
Becomes as aged, and doth beg the alms
Of palsied eld; and when thou art old and rich,
Thou hast neither heat, affection, limb, nor beauty,
To make thy riches pleasant. What's yet in this
That bears the name of life? Yet in this life
Lie hid moe thousand deaths: yet death we fear,
That makes these odds all even.

CLAUDIO:
I humbly thank you.
To sue to live, I find I seek to die;
And, seeking death, find life: let it come on.

ISABELLA:

Provost:
Who's there? come in: the wish deserves a welcome.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Dear sir, ere long I'll visit you again.

CLAUDIO:
Most holy sir, I thank you.

ISABELLA:
My business is a word or two with Claudio.

Provost:
And very welcome. Look, signior, here's your sister.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Provost, a word with you.

Provost:
As many as you please.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Bring me to hear them speak, where I may be concealed.

CLAUDIO:
Now, sister, what's the comfort?

ISABELLA:
Why,
As all comforts are; most good, most good indeed.
Lord Angelo, having affairs to heaven,
Intends you for his swift ambassador,
Where you shall be an everlasting leiger:
Therefore your best appointment make with speed;
To-morrow you set on.

CLAUDIO:
Is there no remedy?

ISABELLA:
None, but such remedy as, to save a head,
To cleave a heart in twain.

CLAUDIO:
But is there any?

ISABELLA:
Yes, brother, you may live:
There is a devilish mercy in the judge,
If you'll implore it, that will free your life,
But fetter you till death.

CLAUDIO:
Perpetual durance?

ISABELLA:
Ay, just; perpetual durance, a restraint,
Though all the world's vastidity you had,
To a determined scope.

CLAUDIO:
But in what nature?

ISABELLA:
In such a one as, you consenting to't,
Would bark your honour from that trunk you bear,
And leave you naked.

CLAUDIO:
Let me know the point.

ISABELLA:
O, I do fear thee, Claudio; and I quake,
Lest thou a feverous life shouldst entertain,
And six or seven winters more respect
Than a perpetual honour. Darest thou die?
The sense of death is most in apprehension;
And the poor beetle, that we tread upon,
In corporal sufferance finds a pang as great
As when a giant dies.

CLAUDIO:
Why give you me this shame?
Think you I can a resolution fetch
From flowery tenderness? If I must die,
I will encounter darkness as a bride,
And hug it in mine arms.

ISABELLA:
There spake my brother; there my father's grave
Did utter forth a voice. Yes, thou must die:
Thou art too noble to conserve a life
In base appliances. This outward-sainted deputy,
Whose settled visage and deliberate word
Nips youth i' the head and follies doth emmew
As falcon doth the fowl, is yet a devil
His filth within being cast, he would appear
A pond as deep as hell.

CLAUDIO:
The prenzie Angelo!

ISABELLA:
O, 'tis the cunning livery of hell,
The damned'st body to invest and cover
In prenzie guards! Dost thou think, Claudio?
If I would yield him my virginity,
Thou mightst be freed.

CLAUDIO:
O heavens! it cannot be.

ISABELLA:
Yes, he would give't thee, from this rank offence,
So to offend him still. This night's the time
That I should do what I abhor to name,
Or else thou diest to-morrow.

CLAUDIO:
Thou shalt not do't.

ISABELLA:
O, were it but my life,
I'ld throw it down for your deliverance
As frankly as a pin.

CLAUDIO:
Thanks, dear Isabel.

ISABELLA:
Be ready, Claudio, for your death tomorrow.

CLAUDIO:
Yes. Has he affections in him,
That thus can make him bite the law by the nose,
When he would force it? Sure, it is no sin,
Or of the deadly seven, it is the least.

ISABELLA:
Which is the least?

CLAUDIO:
If it were damnable, he being so wise,
Why would he for the momentary trick
Be perdurably fined? O Isabel!

ISABELLA:
What says my brother?

CLAUDIO:
Death is a fearful thing.

ISABELLA:
And shamed life a hateful.

CLAUDIO:
Ay, but to die, and go we know not where;
To lie in cold obstruction and to rot;
This sensible warm motion to become
A kneaded clod; and the delighted spirit
To bathe in fiery floods, or to reside
In thrilling region of thick-ribbed ice;
To be imprison'd in the viewless winds,
And blown with restless violence round about
The pendent world; or to be worse than worst
Of those that lawless and incertain thought
Imagine howling: 'tis too horrible!
The weariest and most loathed worldly life
That age, ache, penury and imprisonment
Can lay on nature is a paradise
To what we fear of death.

ISABELLA:
Alas, alas!

CLAUDIO:
Sweet sister, let me live:
What sin you do to save a brother's life,
Nature dispenses with the deed so far
That it becomes a virtue.

ISABELLA:
O you beast!
O faithless coward! O dishonest wretch!
Wilt thou be made a man out of my vice?
Is't not a kind of incest, to take life
From thine own sister's shame? What should I think?
Heaven shield my mother play'd my father fair!
For such a warped slip of wilderness
Ne'er issued from his blood. Take my defiance!
Die, perish! Might but my bending down
Reprieve thee from thy fate, it should proceed:
I'll pray a thousand prayers for thy death,
No word to save thee.

CLAUDIO:
Nay, hear me, Isabel.

ISABELLA:
O, fie, fie, fie!
Thy sin's not accidental, but a trade.
Mercy to thee would prove itself a bawd:
'Tis best thou diest quickly.

CLAUDIO:
O hear me, Isabella!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Vouchsafe a word, young sister, but one word.

ISABELLA:
What is your will?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Might you dispense with your leisure, I would by and
by have some speech with you: the satisfaction I
would require is likewise your own benefit.

ISABELLA:
I have no superfluous leisure; my stay must be
stolen out of other affairs; but I will attend you awhile.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Son, I have overheard what hath passed between you
and your sister. Angelo had never the purpose to
corrupt her; only he hath made an essay of her
virtue to practise his judgment with the disposition
of natures: she, having the truth of honour in her,
hath made him that gracious denial which he is most
glad to receive. I am confessor to Angelo, and I
know this to be true; therefore prepare yourself to
death: do not satisfy your resolution with hopes
that are fallible: tomorrow you must die; go to
your knees and make ready.

CLAUDIO:
Let me ask my sister pardon. I am so out of love
with life that I will sue to be rid of it.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Hold you there: farewell.
Provost, a word with you!

Provost:
What's your will, father

DUKE VINCENTIO:
That now you are come, you will be gone. Leave me
awhile with the maid: my mind promises with my
habit no loss shall touch her by my company.

Provost:
In good time.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
The hand that hath made you fair hath made you good:
the goodness that is cheap in beauty makes beauty
brief in goodness; but grace, being the soul of
your complexion, shall keep the body of it ever
fair. The assault that Angelo hath made to you,
fortune hath conveyed to my understanding; and, but
that frailty hath examples for his falling, I should
wonder at Angelo. How will you do to content this
substitute, and to save your brother?

ISABELLA:
I am now going to resolve him: I had rather my
brother die by the law than my son should be
unlawfully born. But, O, how much is the good duke
deceived in Angelo! If ever he return and I can
speak to him, I will open my lips in vain, or
discover his government.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
That shall not be much amiss: Yet, as the matter
now stands, he will avoid your accusation; he made
trial of you only. Therefore fasten your ear on my
advisings: to the love I have in doing good a
remedy presents itself. I do make myself believe
that you may most uprighteously do a poor wronged
lady a merited benefit; redeem your brother from
the angry law; do no stain to your own gracious
person; and much please the absent duke, if
peradventure he shall ever return to have hearing of
this business.

ISABELLA:
Let me hear you speak farther. I have spirit to do
anything that appears not foul in the truth of my spirit.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Virtue is bold, and goodness never fearful. Have
you not heard speak of Mariana, the sister of
Frederick the great soldier who miscarried at sea?

ISABELLA:
I have heard of the lady, and good words went with her name.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
She should this Angelo have married; was affianced
to her by oath, and the nuptial appointed: between
which time of the contract and limit of the
solemnity, her brother Frederick was wrecked at sea,
having in that perished vessel the dowry of his
sister. But mark how heavily this befell to the
poor gentlewoman: there she lost a noble and
renowned brother, in his love toward her ever most
kind and natural; with him, the portion and sinew of
her fortune, her marriage-dowry; with both, her
combinate husband, this well-seeming Angelo.

ISABELLA:
Can this be so? did Angelo so leave her?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Left her in her tears, and dried not one of them
with his comfort; swallowed his vows whole,
pretending in her discoveries of dishonour: in few,
bestowed her on her own lamentation, which she yet
wears for his sake; and he, a marble to her tears,
is washed with them, but relents not.

ISABELLA:
What a merit were it in death to take this poor maid
from the world! What corruption in this life, that
it will let this man live! But how out of this can she avail?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
It is a rupture that you may easily heal: and the
cure of it not only saves your brother, but keeps
you from dishonour in doing it.

ISABELLA:
Show me how, good father.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
This forenamed maid hath yet in her the continuance
of her first affection: his unjust unkindness, that
in all reason should have quenched her love, hath,
like an impediment in the current, made it more
violent and unruly. Go you to Angelo; answer his
requiring with a plausible obedience; agree with
his demands to the point; only refer yourself to
this advantage, first, that your stay with him may
not be long; that the time may have all shadow and
silence in it; and the place answer to convenience.
This being granted in course,--and now follows
all,--we shall advise this wronged maid to stead up
your appointment, go in your place; if the encounter
acknowledge itself hereafter, it may compel him to
her recompense: and here, by this, is your brother
saved, your honour untainted, the poor Mariana
advantaged, and the corrupt deputy scaled. The maid
will I frame and make fit for his attempt. If you
think well to carry this as you may, the doubleness
of the benefit defends the deceit from reproof.
What think you of it?

ISABELLA:
The image of it gives me content already; and I
trust it will grow to a most prosperous perfection.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
It lies much in your holding up. Haste you speedily
to Angelo: if for this night he entreat you to his
bed, give him promise of satisfaction. I will
presently to Saint Luke's: there, at the moated
grange, resides this dejected Mariana. At that
place call upon me; and dispatch with Angelo, that
it may be quickly.

ISABELLA:
I thank you for this comfort. Fare you well, good father.

ELBOW:


--- End of file: shakespear_16.txt ---

Nay, if there be no remedy for it, but that you will
needs buy and sell men and women like beasts, we
shall have all the world drink brown and white bastard.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
O heavens! what stuff is here

POMPEY:
'Twas never merry world since, of two usuries, the
merriest was put down, and the worser allowed by
order of law a furred gown to keep him warm; and
furred with fox and lamb-skins too, to signify, that
craft, being richer than innocency, stands for the facing.

ELBOW:
Come your way, sir. 'Bless you, good father friar.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
And you, good brother father. What offence hath
this man made you, sir?

ELBOW:
Marry, sir, he hath offended the law: and, sir, we
take him to be a thief too, sir; for we have found
upon him, sir, a strange picklock, which we have
sent to the deputy.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Fie, sirrah! a bawd, a wicked bawd!
The evil that thou causest to be done,
That is thy means to live. Do thou but think
What 'tis to cram a maw or clothe a back
From such a filthy vice: say to thyself,
From their abominable and beastly touches
I drink, I eat, array myself, and live.
Canst thou believe thy living is a life,
So stinkingly depending? Go mend, go mend.

POMPEY:
Indeed, it does stink in some sort, sir; but yet,
sir, I would prove--

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Nay, if the devil have given thee proofs for sin,
Thou wilt prove his. Take him to prison, officer:
Correction and instruction must both work
Ere this rude beast will profit.

ELBOW:
He must before the deputy, sir; he has given him
warning: the deputy cannot abide a whoremaster: if
he be a whoremonger, and comes before him, he were
as good go a mile on his errand.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
That we were all, as some would seem to be,
From our faults, as faults from seeming, free!

ELBOW:
His neck will come to your waist,--a cord, sir.

POMPEY:
I spy comfort; I cry bail. Here's a gentleman and a
friend of mine.

LUCIO:
How now, noble Pompey! What, at the wheels of
Caesar? art thou led in triumph? What, is there
none of Pygmalion's images, newly made woman, to be
had now, for putting the hand in the pocket and
extracting it clutch'd? What reply, ha? What
sayest thou to this tune, matter and method? Is't
not drowned i' the last rain, ha? What sayest
thou, Trot? Is the world as it was, man? Which is
the way? Is it sad, and few words? or how? The
trick of it?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Still thus, and thus; still worse!

LUCIO:
How doth my dear morsel, thy mistress? Procures she
still, ha?

POMPEY:
Troth, sir, she hath eaten up all her beef, and she
is herself in the tub.

LUCIO:
Why, 'tis good; it is the right of it; it must be
so: ever your fresh whore and your powdered bawd:
an unshunned consequence; it must be so. Art going
to prison, Pompey?

POMPEY:
Yes, faith, sir.

LUCIO:
Why, 'tis not amiss, Pompey. Farewell: go, say I
sent thee thither. For debt, Pompey? or how?

ELBOW:
For being a bawd, for being a bawd.

LUCIO:
Well, then, imprison him: if imprisonment be the
due of a bawd, why, 'tis his right: bawd is he
doubtless, and of antiquity too; bawd-born.
Farewell, good Pompey. Commend me to the prison,
Pompey: you will turn good husband now, Pompey; you
will keep the house.

POMPEY:
I hope, sir, your good worship will be my bail.

LUCIO:
No, indeed, will I not, Pompey; it is not the wear.
I will pray, Pompey, to increase your bondage: If
you take it not patiently, why, your mettle is the
more. Adieu, trusty Pompey. 'Bless you, friar.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
And you.

LUCIO:
Does Bridget paint still, Pompey, ha?

ELBOW:
Come your ways, sir; come.

POMPEY:
You will not bail me, then, sir?

LUCIO:
Then, Pompey, nor now. What news abroad, friar?
what news?

ELBOW:
Come your ways, sir; come.

LUCIO:
Go to kennel, Pompey; go.
What news, friar, of the duke?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I know none. Can you tell me of any?

LUCIO:
Some say he is with the Emperor of Russia; other
some, he is in Rome: but where is he, think you?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I know not where; but wheresoever, I wish him well.

LUCIO:
It was a mad fantastical trick of him to steal from
the state, and usurp the beggary he was never born
to. Lord Angelo dukes it well in his absence; he
puts transgression to 't.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
He does well in 't.

LUCIO:
A little more lenity to lechery would do no harm in
him: something too crabbed that way, friar.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
It is too general a vice, and severity must cure it.

LUCIO:
Yes, in good sooth, the vice is of a great kindred;
it is well allied: but it is impossible to extirp
it quite, friar, till eating and drinking be put
down. They say this Angelo was not made by man and
woman after this downright way of creation: is it
true, think you?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
How should he be made, then?

LUCIO:
Some report a sea-maid spawned him; some, that he
was begot between two stock-fishes. But it is
certain that when he makes water his urine is
congealed ice; that I know to be true: and he is a
motion generative; that's infallible.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
You are pleasant, sir, and speak apace.

LUCIO:
Why, what a ruthless thing is this in him, for the
rebellion of a codpiece to take away the life of a
man! Would the duke that is absent have done this?
Ere he would have hanged a man for the getting a
hundred bastards, he would have paid for the nursing
a thousand: he had some feeling of the sport: he
knew the service, and that instructed him to mercy.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I never heard the absent duke much detected for
women; he was not inclined that way.

LUCIO:
O, sir, you are deceived.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
'Tis not possible.

LUCIO:
Who, not the duke? yes, your beggar of fifty; and
his use was to put a ducat in her clack-dish: the
duke had crotchets in him. He would be drunk too;
that let me inform you.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
You do him wrong, surely.

LUCIO:
Sir, I was an inward of his. A shy fellow was the
duke: and I believe I know the cause of his
withdrawing.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
What, I prithee, might be the cause?

LUCIO:
No, pardon; 'tis a secret must be locked within the
teeth and the lips: but this I can let you
understand, the greater file of the subject held the
duke to be wise.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Wise! why, no question but he was.

LUCIO:
A very superficial, ignorant, unweighing fellow.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Either this is the envy in you, folly, or mistaking:
the very stream of his life and the business he hath
helmed must upon a warranted need give him a better
proclamation. Let him be but testimonied in his own
bringings-forth, and he shall appear to the
envious a scholar, a statesman and a soldier.
Therefore you speak unskilfully: or if your
knowledge be more it is much darkened in your malice.

LUCIO:
Sir, I know him, and I love him.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Love talks with better knowledge, and knowledge with
dearer love.

LUCIO:
Come, sir, I know what I know.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I can hardly believe that, since you know not what
you speak. But, if ever the duke return, as our
prayers are he may, let me desire you to make your
answer before him. If it be honest you have spoke,
you have courage to maintain it: I am bound to call
upon you; and, I pray you, your name?

LUCIO:
Sir, my name is Lucio; well known to the duke.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
He shall know you better, sir, if I may live to
report you.

LUCIO:
I fear you not.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
O, you hope the duke will return no more; or you
imagine me too unhurtful an opposite. But indeed I
can do you little harm; you'll forswear this again.

LUCIO:
I'll be hanged first: thou art deceived in me,
friar. But no more of this. Canst thou tell if
Claudio die to-morrow or no?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Why should he die, sir?

LUCIO:
Why? For filling a bottle with a tundish. I would
the duke we talk of were returned again: the
ungenitured agent will unpeople the province with
continency; sparrows must not build in his
house-eaves, because they are lecherous. The duke
yet would have dark deeds darkly answered; he would
never bring them to light: would he were returned!
Marry, this Claudio is condemned for untrussing.
Farewell, good friar: I prithee, pray for me. The
duke, I say to thee again, would eat mutton on
Fridays. He's not past it yet, and I say to thee,
he would mouth with a beggar, though she smelt brown
bread and garlic: say that I said so. Farewell.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
No might nor greatness in mortality
Can censure 'scape; back-wounding calumny
The whitest virtue strikes. What king so strong
Can tie the gall up in the slanderous tongue?
But who comes here?

ESCALUS:
Go; away with her to prison!

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
Good my lord, be good to me; your honour is accounted
a merciful man; good my lord.

ESCALUS:
Double and treble admonition, and still forfeit in
the same kind! This would make mercy swear and play
the tyrant.

Provost:
A bawd of eleven years' continuance, may it please
your honour.

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
My lord, this is one Lucio's information against me.
Mistress Kate Keepdown was with child by him in the
duke's time; he promised her marriage: his child
is a year and a quarter old, come Philip and Jacob:
I have kept it myself; and see how he goes about to abuse me!

ESCALUS:
That fellow is a fellow of much licence: let him be
called before us. Away with her to prison! Go to;
no more words.
Provost, my brother Angelo will not be altered;
Claudio must die to-morrow: let him be furnished
with divines, and have all charitable preparation.
if my brother wrought by my pity, it should not be
so with him.

Provost:
So please you, this friar hath been with him, and
advised him for the entertainment of death.

ESCALUS:
Good even, good father.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Bliss and goodness on you!

ESCALUS:
Of whence are you?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Not of this country, though my chance is now
To use it for my time: I am a brother
Of gracious order, late come from the See
In special business from his holiness.

ESCALUS:
What news abroad i' the world?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
None, but that there is so great a fever on
goodness, that the dissolution of it must cure it:
novelty is only in request; and it is as dangerous
to be aged in any kind of course, as it is virtuous
to be constant in any undertaking. There is scarce
truth enough alive to make societies secure; but
security enough to make fellowships accurst: much
upon this riddle runs the wisdom of the world. This
news is old enough, yet it is every day's news. I
pray you, sir, of what disposition was the duke?

ESCALUS:
One that, above all other strifes, contended
especially to know himself.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
What pleasure was he given to?

ESCALUS:
Rather rejoicing to see another merry, than merry at
any thing which professed to make him rejoice: a
gentleman of all temperance. But leave we him to
his events, with a prayer they may prove prosperous;
and let me desire to know how you find Claudio
prepared. I am made to understand that you have
lent him visitation.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
He professes to have received no sinister measure
from his judge, but most willingly humbles himself
to the determination of justice: yet had he framed
to himself, by the instruction of his frailty, many
deceiving promises of life; which I by my good
leisure have discredited to him, and now is he
resolved to die.

ESCALUS:
You have paid the heavens your function, and the
prisoner the very debt of your calling. I have
laboured for the poor gentleman to the extremest
shore of my modesty: but my brother justice have I
found so severe, that he hath forced me to tell him
he is indeed Justice.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
If his own life answer the straitness of his
proceeding, it shall become him well; wherein if he
chance to fail, he hath sentenced himself.

ESCALUS:
I am going to visit the prisoner. Fare you well.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Peace be with you!
He who the sword of heaven will bear
Should be as holy as severe;
Pattern in himself to know,
Grace to stand, and virtue go;
More nor less to others paying
Than by self-offences weighing.
Shame to him whose cruel striking
Kills for faults of his own liking!
Twice treble shame on Angelo,
To weed my vice and let his grow!
O, what may man within him hide,
Though angel on the outward side!
How may likeness made in crimes,
Making practise on the times,
To draw with idle spiders' strings
Most ponderous and substantial things!
Craft against vice I must apply:
With Angelo to-night shall lie
His old betrothed but despised;
So disguise shall, by the disguised,
Pay with falsehood false exacting,
And perform an old contracting.


MARIANA:
Break off thy song, and haste thee quick away:
Here comes a man of comfort, whose advice
Hath often still'd my brawling discontent.
I cry you mercy, sir; and well could wish
You had not found me here so musical:
Let me excuse me, and believe me so,
My mirth it much displeased, but pleased my woe.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
'Tis good; though music oft hath such a charm
To make bad good, and good provoke to harm.
I pray, you, tell me, hath any body inquired
for me here to-day? much upon this time have
I promised here to meet.

MARIANA:
You have not been inquired after:
I have sat here all day.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I do constantly believe you. The time is come even
now. I shall crave your forbearance a little: may
be I will call upon you anon, for some advantage to yourself.

MARIANA:
I am always bound to you.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Very well met, and well come.
What is the news from this good deputy?

ISABELLA:
He hath a garden circummured with brick,
Whose western side is with a vineyard back'd;
And to that vineyard is a planched gate,
That makes his opening with this bigger key:
This other doth command a little door
Which from the vineyard to the garden leads;
There have I made my promise
Upon the heavy middle of the night
To call upon him.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
But shall you on your knowledge find this way?

ISABELLA:
I have ta'en a due and wary note upon't:
With whispering and most guilty diligence,
In action all of precept, he did show me
The way twice o'er.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Are there no other tokens
Between you 'greed concerning her observance?

ISABELLA:
No, none, but only a repair i' the dark;
And that I have possess'd him my most stay
Can be but brief; for I have made him know
I have a servant comes with me along,
That stays upon me, whose persuasion is
I come about my brother.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
'Tis well borne up.
I have not yet made known to Mariana
A word of this. What, ho! within! come forth!
I pray you, be acquainted with this maid;
She comes to do you good.

ISABELLA:
I do desire the like.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Do you persuade yourself that I respect you?

MARIANA:
Good friar, I know you do, and have found it.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Take, then, this your companion by the hand,
Who hath a story ready for your ear.
I shall attend your leisure: but make haste;
The vaporous night approaches.

MARIANA:
Will't please you walk aside?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
O place and greatness! millions of false eyes
Are stuck upon thee: volumes of report
Run with these false and most contrarious quests
Upon thy doings: thousand escapes of wit
Make thee the father of their idle dreams
And rack thee in their fancies.
Welcome, how agreed?

ISABELLA:
She'll take the enterprise upon her, father,
If you advise it.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
It is not my consent,
But my entreaty too.

ISABELLA:
Little have you to say
When you depart from him, but, soft and low,
'Remember now my brother.'

MARIANA:
Fear me not.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Nor, gentle daughter, fear you not at all.
He is your husband on a pre-contract:
To bring you thus together, 'tis no sin,
Sith that the justice of your title to him
Doth flourish the deceit. Come, let us go:
Our corn's to reap, for yet our tithe's to sow.

Provost:
Come hither, sirrah. Can you cut off a man's head?

POMPEY:
If the man be a bachelor, sir, I can; but if he be a
married man, he's his wife's head, and I can never
cut off a woman's head.

Provost:
Come, sir, leave me your snatches, and yield me a
direct answer. To-morrow morning are to die Claudio
and Barnardine. Here is in our prison a common
executioner, who in his office lacks a helper: if
you will take it on you to assist him, it shall
redeem you from your gyves; if not, you shall have
your full time of imprisonment and your deliverance
with an unpitied whipping, for you have been a
notorious bawd.

POMPEY:
Sir, I have been an unlawful bawd time out of mind;
but yet I will be content to be a lawful hangman. I
would be glad to receive some instruction from my
fellow partner.

Provost:
What, ho! Abhorson! Where's Abhorson, there?

ABHORSON:
Do you call, sir?

Provost:
Sirrah, here's a fellow will help you to-morrow in
your execution. If you think it meet, compound with
him by the year, and let him abide here with you; if
not, use him for the present and dismiss him. He
cannot plead his estimation with you; he hath been a bawd.

ABHORSON:
A bawd, sir? fie upon him! he will discredit our mystery.

Provost:
Go to, sir; you weigh equally; a feather will turn
the scale.

POMPEY:
Pray, sir, by your good favour,--for surely, sir, a
good favour you have, but that you have a hanging
look,--do you call, sir, your occupation a mystery?

ABHORSON:
Ay, sir; a mystery

POMPEY:
Painting, sir, I have heard say, is a mystery; and
your whores, sir, being members of my occupation,
using painting, do prove my occupation a mystery:
but what mystery there should be in hanging, if I
should be hanged, I cannot imagine.

ABHORSON:
Sir, it is a mystery.

POMPEY:
Proof?

ABHORSON:
Every true man's apparel fits your thief: if it be
too little for your thief, your true man thinks it
big enough; if it be too big for your thief, your
thief thinks it little enough: so every true man's
apparel fits your thief.

Provost:
Are you agreed?

POMPEY:
Sir, I will serve him; for I do find your hangman is
a more penitent trade than your bawd; he doth
oftener ask forgiveness.

Provost:
You, sirrah, provide your block and your axe
to-morrow four o'clock.

ABHORSON:
Come on, bawd; I will instruct thee in my trade; follow.

POMPEY:
I do desire to learn, sir: and I hope, if you have
occasion to use me for your own turn, you shall find
me yare; for truly, sir, for your kindness I owe you
a good turn.

Provost:
Call hither Barnardine and Claudio:
The one has my pity; not a jot the other,
Being a murderer, though he were my brother.
Look, here's the warrant, Claudio, for thy death:
'Tis now dead midnight, and by eight to-morrow
Thou must be made immortal. Where's Barnardine?

CLAUDIO:
As fast lock'd up in sleep as guiltless labour
When it lies starkly in the traveller's bones:
He will not wake.

Provost:
Who can do good on him?
Well, go, prepare yourself.
But, hark, what noise?
Heaven give your spirits comfort!
By and by.
I hope it is some pardon or reprieve
For the most gentle Claudio.
Welcome father.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
The best and wholesomest spirts of the night
Envelope you, good Provost! Who call'd here of late?

Provost:
None, since the curfew rung.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Not Isabel?

Provost:
No.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
They will, then, ere't be long.

Provost:
What comfort is for Claudio?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
There's some in hope.

Provost:
It is a bitter deputy.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Not so, not so; his life is parallel'd
Even with the stroke and line of his great justice:
He doth with holy abstinence subdue
That in himself which he spurs on his power
To qualify in others: were he meal'd with that
Which he corrects, then were he tyrannous;
But this being so, he's just.
Now are they come.
This is a gentle provost: seldom when
The steeled gaoler is the friend of men.
How now! what noise? That spirit's possessed with haste
That wounds the unsisting postern with these strokes.

Provost:
There he must stay until the officer
Arise to let him in: he is call'd up.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Have you no countermand for Claudio yet,
But he must die to-morrow?

Provost:
None, sir, none.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
As near the dawning, provost, as it is,
You shall hear more ere morning.

Provost:
Happily
You something know; yet I believe there comes
No countermand; no such example have we:
Besides, upon the very siege of justice
Lord Angelo hath to the public ear
Profess'd the contrary.
This is his lordship's man.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
And here comes Claudio's pardon.

Messenger:

Provost:
I shall obey him.

DUKE VINCENTIO:

Provost:
I told you. Lord Angelo, belike thinking me remiss
in mine office, awakens me with this unwonted
putting-on; methinks strangely, for he hath not used it before.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Pray you, let's hear.

Provost:

DUKE VINCENTIO:
What is that Barnardine who is to be executed in the
afternoon?

Provost:
A Bohemian born, but here nursed un and bred; one
that is a prisoner nine years old.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
How came it that the absent duke had not either
delivered him to his liberty or executed him? I
have heard it was ever his manner to do so.

Provost:
His friends still wrought reprieves for him: and,
indeed, his fact, till now in the government of Lord
Angelo, came not to an undoubtful proof.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
It is now apparent?

Provost:
Most manifest, and not denied by himself.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Hath he born himself penitently in prison? how
seems he to be touched?

Provost:
A man that apprehends death no more dreadfully but
as a drunken sleep; careless, reckless, and fearless
of what's past, present, or to come; insensible of
mortality, and desperately mortal.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
He wants advice.

Provost:
He will hear none: he hath evermore had the liberty
of the prison; give him leave to escape hence, he
would not: drunk many times a day, if not many days
entirely drunk. We have very oft awaked him, as if
to carry him to execution, and showed him a seeming
warrant for it: it hath not moved him at all.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
More of him anon. There is written in your brow,
provost, honesty and constancy: if I read it not
truly, my ancient skill beguiles me; but, in the
boldness of my cunning, I will lay myself in hazard.
Claudio, whom here you have warrant to execute, is
no greater forfeit to the law than Angelo who hath
sentenced him. To make you understand this in a
manifested effect, I crave but four days' respite;
for the which you are to do me both a present and a
dangerous courtesy.

Provost:
Pray, sir, in what?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
In the delaying death.

Provost:
A lack, how may I do it, having the hour limited,
and an express command, under penalty, to deliver
his head in the view of Angelo? I may make my case
as Claudio's, to cross this in the smallest.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
By the vow of mine order I warrant you, if my
instructions may be your guide. Let this Barnardine
be this morning executed, and his head born to Angelo.

Provost:
Angelo hath seen them both, and will discover the favour.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
O, death's a great disguiser; and you may add to it.
Shave the head, and tie the beard; and say it was
the desire of the penitent to be so bared before his
death: you know the course is common. If any thing
fall to you upon this, more than thanks and good
fortune, by the saint whom I profess, I will plead
against it with my life.

Provost:
Pardon me, good father; it is against my oath.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Were you sworn to the duke, or to the deputy?

Provost:
To him, and to his substitutes.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
You will think you have made no offence, if the duke
avouch the justice of your dealing?

Provost:
But what likelihood is in that?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Not a resemblance, but a certainty. Yet since I see
you fearful, that neither my coat, integrity, nor
persuasion can with ease attempt you, I will go
further than I meant, to pluck all fears out of you.
Look you, sir, here is the hand and seal of the
duke: you know the character, I doubt not; and the
signet is not strange to you.

Provost:
I know them both.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
The contents of this is the return of the duke: you
shall anon over-read it at your pleasure; where you
shall find, within these two days he will be here.
This is a thing that Angelo knows not; for he this
very day receives letters of strange tenor;
perchance of the duke's death; perchance entering
into some monastery; but, by chance, nothing of what
is writ. Look, the unfolding star calls up the
shepherd. Put not yourself into amazement how these
things should be: all difficulties are but easy
when they are known. Call your executioner, and off
with Barnardine's head: I will give him a present
shrift and advise him for a better place. Yet you
are amazed; but this shall absolutely resolve you.
Come away; it is almost clear dawn.

POMPEY:
I am as well acquainted here as I was in our house
of profession: one would think it were Mistress
Overdone's own house, for here be many of her old
customers. First, here's young Master Rash; he's in
for a commodity of brown paper and old ginger,
ninescore and seventeen pounds; of which he made
five marks, ready money: marry, then ginger was not
much in request, for the old women were all dead.
Then is there here one Master Caper, at the suit of
Master Three-pile the mercer, for some four suits of
peach-coloured satin, which now peaches him a
beggar. Then have we here young Dizy, and young
Master Deep-vow, and Master Copperspur, and Master
Starve-lackey the rapier and dagger man, and young
Drop-heir that killed lusty Pudding, and Master
Forthlight the tilter, and brave Master Shooty the
great traveller, and wild Half-can that stabbed
Pots, and, I think, forty more; all great doers in
our trade, and are now 'for the Lord's sake.'

ABHORSON:
Sirrah, bring Barnardine hither.

POMPEY:
Master Barnardine! you must rise and be hanged.
Master Barnardine!

ABHORSON:
What, ho, Barnardine!

BARNARDINE:

POMPEY:
Your friends, sir; the hangman. You must be so
good, sir, to rise and be put to death.

BARNARDINE:

ABHORSON:
Tell him he must awake, and that quickly too.

POMPEY:
Pray, Master Barnardine, awake till you are
executed, and sleep afterwards.

ABHORSON:
Go in to him, and fetch him out.

POMPEY:
He is coming, sir, he is coming; I hear his straw rustle.

ABHORSON:
Is the axe upon the block, sirrah?

POMPEY:
Very ready, sir.

BARNARDINE:
How now, Abhorson? what's the news with you?

ABHORSON:
Truly, sir, I would desire you to clap into your
prayers; for, look you, the warrant's come.

BARNARDINE:
You rogue, I have been drinking all night; I am not
fitted for 't.

POMPEY:
O, the better, sir; for he that drinks all night,
and is hanged betimes in the morning, may sleep the
sounder all the next day.

ABHORSON:
Look you, sir; here comes your ghostly father: do
we jest now, think you?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Sir, induced by my charity, and hearing how hastily
you are to depart, I am come to advise you, comfort
you and pray with you.

BARNARDINE:
Friar, not I I have been drinking hard all night,
and I will have more time to prepare me, or they
shall beat out my brains with billets: I will not
consent to die this day, that's certain.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
O, sir, you must: and therefore I beseech you
Look forward on the journey you shall go.

BARNARDINE:
I swear I will not die to-day for any man's
persuasion.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
But hear you.

BARNARDINE:
Not a word: if you have any thing to say to me,
come to my ward; for thence will not I to-day.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Unfit to live or die: O gravel heart!
After him, fellows; bring him to the block.

Provost:
Now, sir, how do you find the prisoner?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
A creature unprepared, unmeet for death;
And to transport him in the mind he is
Were damnable.

Provost:
Here in the prison, father,
There died this morning of a cruel fever
One Ragozine, a most notorious pirate,
A man of Claudio's years; his beard and head
Just of his colour. What if we do omit
This reprobate till he were well inclined;
And satisfy the deputy with the visage
Of Ragozine, more like to Claudio?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
O, 'tis an accident that heaven provides!
Dispatch it presently; the hour draws on
Prefix'd by Angelo: see this be done,
And sent according to command; whiles I
Persuade this rude wretch willingly to die.

Provost:
This shall be done, good father, presently.
But Barnardine must die this afternoon:
And how shall we continue Claudio,
To save me from the danger that might come
If he were known alive?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Let this be done.
Put them in secret holds, both Barnardine and Claudio:
Ere twice the sun hath made his journal greeting
To the under generation, you shall find
Your safety manifested.

Provost:
I am your free dependant.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Quick, dispatch, and send the head to Angelo.
Now will I write letters to Angelo,--
The provost, he shall bear them, whose contents
Shall witness to him I am near at home,
And that, by great injunctions, I am bound
To enter publicly: him I'll desire
To meet me at the consecrated fount
A league below the city; and from thence,
By cold gradation and well-balanced form,
We shall proceed with Angelo.

Provost:
Here is the head; I'll carry it myself.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Convenient is it. Make a swift return;
For I would commune with you of such things
That want no ear but yours.

Provost:
I'll make all speed.

ISABELLA:

DUKE VINCENTIO:
The tongue of Isabel. She's come to know
If yet her brother's pardon be come hither:
But I will keep her ignorant of her good,
To make her heavenly comforts of despair,
When it is least expected.

ISABELLA:
Ho, by your leave!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Good morning to you, fair and gracious daughter.

ISABELLA:
The better, given me by so holy a man.
Hath yet the deputy sent my brother's pardon?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
He hath released him, Isabel, from the world:
His head is off and sent to Angelo.

ISABELLA:
Nay, but it is not so.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
It is no other: show your wisdom, daughter,
In your close patience.

ISABELLA:
O, I will to him and pluck out his eyes!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
You shall not be admitted to his sight.

ISABELLA:
Unhappy Claudio! wretched Isabel!
Injurious world! most damned Angelo!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
This nor hurts him nor profits you a jot;
Forbear it therefore; give your cause to heaven.
Mark what I say, which you shall find
By every syllable a faithful verity:
The duke comes home to-morrow; nay, dry your eyes;
One of our convent, and his confessor,
Gives me this instance: already he hath carried
Notice to Escalus and Angelo,
Who do prepare to meet him at the gates,
There to give up their power. If you can, pace your wisdom
In that good path that I would wish it go,
And you shall have your bosom on this wretch,
Grace of the duke, revenges to your heart,
And general honour.

ISABELLA:
I am directed by you.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
This letter, then, to Friar Peter give;
'Tis that he sent me of the duke's return:
Say, by this token, I desire his company
At Mariana's house to-night. Her cause and yours
I'll perfect him withal, and he shall bring you
Before the duke, and to the head of Angelo
Accuse him home and home. For my poor self,
I am combined by a sacred vow
And shall be absent. Wend you with this letter:
Command these fretting waters from your eyes
With a light heart; trust not my holy order,
If I pervert your course. Who's here?

LUCIO:
Good even. Friar, where's the provost?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Not within, sir.

LUCIO:
O pretty Isabella, I am pale at mine heart to see
thine eyes so red: thou must be patient. I am fain
to dine and sup with water and bran; I dare not for
my head fill my belly; one fruitful meal would set
me to 't. But they say the duke will be here
to-morrow. By my troth, Isabel, I loved thy brother:
if the old fantastical duke of dark corners had been
at home, he had lived.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Sir, the duke is marvellous little beholding to your
reports; but the best is, he lives not in them.

LUCIO:
Friar, thou knowest not the duke so well as I do:
he's a better woodman than thou takest him for.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Well, you'll answer this one day. Fare ye well.

LUCIO:
Nay, tarry; I'll go along with thee
I can tell thee pretty tales of the duke.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
You have told me too many of him already, sir, if
they be true; if not true, none were enough.

LUCIO:
I was once before him for getting a wench with child.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Did you such a thing?

LUCIO:
Yes, marry, did I but I was fain to forswear it;
they would else have married me to the rotten medlar.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Sir, your company is fairer than honest. Rest you well.

LUCIO:
By my troth, I'll go with thee to the lane's end:
if bawdy talk offend you, we'll have very little of
it. Nay, friar, I am a kind of burr; I shall stick.

ESCALUS:
Every letter he hath writ hath disvouched other.

ANGELO:
In most uneven and distracted manner. His actions
show much like to madness: pray heaven his wisdom be
not tainted! And why meet him at the gates, and
redeliver our authorities there

ESCALUS:
I guess not.

ANGELO:
And why should we proclaim it in an hour before his
entering, that if any crave redress of injustice,
they should exhibit their petitions in the street?

ESCALUS:
He shows his reason for that: to have a dispatch of
complaints, and to deliver us from devices
hereafter, which shall then have no power to stand
against us.

ANGELO:
Well, I beseech you, let it be proclaimed betimes
i' the morn; I'll call you at your house: give
notice to such men of sort and suit as are to meet
him.

ESCALUS:
I shall, sir. Fare you well.

ANGELO:
Good night.
This deed unshapes me quite, makes me unpregnant
And dull to all proceedings. A deflower'd maid!
And by an eminent body that enforced
The law against it! But that her tender shame
Will not proclaim against her maiden loss,
How might she tongue me! Yet reason dares her no;
For my authority bears of a credent bulk,
That no particular scandal once can touch
But it confounds the breather. He should have lived,
Save that riotous youth, with dangerous sense,
Might in the times to come have ta'en revenge,
By so receiving a dishonour'd life
With ransom of such shame. Would yet he had lived!
A lack, when once our grace we have forgot,
Nothing goes right: we would, and we would not.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
These letters at fit time deliver me
The provost knows our purpose and our plot.
The matter being afoot, keep your instruction,
And hold you ever to our special drift;
Though sometimes you do blench from this to that,
As cause doth minister. Go call at Flavius' house,
And tell him where I stay: give the like notice
To Valentinus, Rowland, and to Crassus,
And bid them bring the trumpets to the gate;
But send me Flavius first.

FRIAR PETER:
It shall be speeded well.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I thank thee, Varrius; thou hast made good haste:
Come, we will walk. There's other of our friends
Will greet us here anon, my gentle Varrius.

ISABELLA:
To speak so indirectly I am loath:
I would say the truth; but to accuse him so,
That is your part: yet I am advised to do it;
He says, to veil full purpose.

MARIANA:
Be ruled by him.

ISABELLA:
Besides, he tells me that, if peradventure
He speak against me on the adverse side,
I should not think it strange; for 'tis a physic
That's bitter to sweet end.

MARIANA:
I would Friar Peter--

ISABELLA:
O, peace! the friar is come.

FRIAR PETER:
Come, I have found you out a stand most fit,
Where you may have such vantage on the duke,
He shall not pass you. Twice have the trumpets sounded;
The generous and gravest citizens
Have hent the gates, and very near upon
The duke is entering: therefore, hence, away!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
My very worthy cousin, fairly met!
Our old and faithful friend, we are glad to see you.

ANGELO:
Happy return be to your royal grace!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Many and hearty thankings to you both.
We have made inquiry of you; and we hear
Such goodness of your justice, that our soul
Cannot but yield you forth to public thanks,
Forerunning more requital.

ANGELO:
You make my bonds still greater.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
O, your desert speaks loud; and I should wrong it,
To lock it in the wards of covert bosom,
When it deserves, with characters of brass,
A forted residence 'gainst the tooth of time
And razure of oblivion. Give me your hand,
And let the subject see, to make them know
That outward courtesies would fain proclaim
Favours that keep within. Come, Escalus,
You must walk by us on our other hand;
And good supporters are you.

FRIAR PETER:
Now is your time: speak loud and kneel before him.

ISABELLA:
Justice, O royal duke! Vail your regard
Upon a wrong'd, I would fain have said, a maid!
O worthy prince, dishonour not your eye
By throwing it on any other object
Till you have heard me in my true complaint
And given me justice, justice, justice, justice!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Relate your wrongs; in what? by whom? be brief.
Here is Lord Angelo shall give you justice:
Reveal yourself to him.

ISABELLA:
O worthy duke,
You bid me seek redemption of the devil:
Hear me yourself; for that which I must speak
Must either punish me, not being believed,
Or wring redress from you. Hear me, O hear me, here!

ANGELO:
My lord, her wits, I fear me, are not firm:
She hath been a suitor to me for her brother
Cut off by course of justice,--

ISABELLA:
By course of justice!

ANGELO:
And she will speak most bitterly and strange.

ISABELLA:
Most strange, but yet most truly, will I speak:
That Angelo's forsworn; is it not strange?
That Angelo's a murderer; is 't not strange?
That Angelo is an adulterous thief,
An hypocrite, a virgin-violator;
Is it not strange and strange?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Nay, it is ten times strange.

ISABELLA:
It is not truer he is Angelo
Than this is all as true as it is strange:
Nay, it is ten times true; for truth is truth
To the end of reckoning.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Away with her! Poor soul,
She speaks this in the infirmity of sense.

ISABELLA:
O prince, I conjure thee, as thou believest
There is another comfort than this world,
That thou neglect me not, with that opinion
That I am touch'd with madness! Make not impossible
That which but seems unlike: 'tis not impossible
But one, the wicked'st caitiff on the ground,
May seem as shy, as grave, as just, as absolute
As Angelo; even so may Angelo,
In all his dressings, characts, titles, forms,
Be an arch-villain; believe it, royal prince:
If he be less, he's nothing; but he's more,
Had I more name for badness.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
By mine honesty,
If she be mad,--as I believe no other,--
Her madness hath the oddest frame of sense,
Such a dependency of thing on thing,
As e'er I heard in madness.

ISABELLA:
O gracious duke,
Harp not on that, nor do not banish reason
For inequality; but let your reason serve
To make the truth appear where it seems hid,
And hide the false seems true.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Many that are not mad
Have, sure, more lack of reason. What would you say?

ISABELLA:
I am the sister of one Claudio,
Condemn'd upon the act of fornication
To lose his head; condemn'd by Angelo:
I, in probation of a sisterhood,
Was sent to by my brother; one Lucio
As then the messenger,--

LUCIO:
That's I, an't like your grace:
I came to her from Claudio, and desired her
To try her gracious fortune with Lord Angelo
For her poor brother's pardon.

ISABELLA:
That's he indeed.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
You were not bid to speak.

LUCIO:
No, my good lord;
Nor wish'd to hold my peace.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I wish you now, then;
Pray you, take note of it: and when you have
A business for yourself, pray heaven you then
Be perfect.

LUCIO:
I warrant your honour.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
The warrants for yourself; take heed to't.

ISABELLA:
This gentleman told somewhat of my tale,--

LUCIO:
Right.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
It may be right; but you are i' the wrong
To speak before your time. Proceed.

ISABELLA:
I went
To this pernicious caitiff deputy,--

DUKE VINCENTIO:
That's somewhat madly spoken.

ISABELLA:
Pardon it;
The phrase is to the matter.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Mended again. The matter; proceed.

ISABELLA:
In brief, to set the needless process by,
How I persuaded, how I pray'd, and kneel'd,
How he refell'd me, and how I replied,--
For this was of much length,--the vile conclusion
I now begin with grief and shame to utter:
He would not, but by gift of my chaste body
To his concupiscible intemperate lust,
Release my brother; and, after much debatement,
My sisterly remorse confutes mine honour,
And I did yield to him: but the next morn betimes,
His purpose surfeiting, he sends a warrant
For my poor brother's head.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
This is most likely!

ISABELLA:
O, that it were as like as it is true!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
By heaven, fond wretch, thou knowist not what thou speak'st,
Or else thou art suborn'd against his honour
In hateful practise. First, his integrity
Stands without blemish. Next, it imports no reason
That with such vehemency he should pursue
Faults proper to himself: if he had so offended,
He would have weigh'd thy brother by himself
And not have cut him off. Some one hath set you on:
Confess the truth, and say by whose advice
Thou camest here to complain.

ISABELLA:
And is this all?
Then, O you blessed ministers above,
Keep me in patience, and with ripen'd time
Unfold the evil which is here wrapt up
In countenance! Heaven shield your grace from woe,
As I, thus wrong'd, hence unbelieved go!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I know you'ld fain be gone. An officer!
To prison with her! Shall we thus permit
A blasting and a scandalous breath to fall
On him so near us? This needs must be a practise.
Who knew of Your intent and coming hither?

ISABELLA:
One that I would were here, Friar Lodowick.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
A ghostly father, belike. Who knows that Lodowick?

LUCIO:
My lord, I know him; 'tis a meddling friar;
I do not like the man: had he been lay, my lord
For certain words he spake against your grace
In your retirement, I had swinged him soundly.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Words against me? this is a good friar, belike!
And to set on this wretched woman here
Against our substitute! Let this friar be found.

LUCIO:
But yesternight, my lord, she and that friar,
I saw them at the prison: a saucy friar,
A very scurvy fellow.

FRIAR PETER:
Blessed be your royal grace!
I have stood by, my lord, and I have heard
Your royal ear abused. First, hath this woman
Most wrongfully accused your substitute,
Who is as free from touch or soil with her
As she from one ungot.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
We did believe no less.
Know you that Friar Lodowick that she speaks of?

FRIAR PETER:
I know him for a man divine and holy;
Not scurvy, nor a temporary meddler,
As he's reported by this gentleman;
And, on my trust, a man that never yet
Did, as he vouches, misreport your grace.

LUCIO:
My lord, most villanously; believe it.

FRIAR PETER:
Well, he in time may come to clear himself;
But at this instant he is sick my lord,
Of a strange fever. Upon his mere request,
Being come to knowledge that there was complaint
Intended 'gainst Lord Angelo, came I hither,
To speak, as from his mouth, what he doth know
Is true and false; and what he with his oath
And all probation will make up full clear,
Whensoever he's convented. First, for this woman.
To justify this worthy nobleman,
So vulgarly and personally accused,
Her shall you hear disproved to her eyes,
Till she herself confess it.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Good friar, let's hear it.
Do you not smile at this, Lord Angelo?
O heaven, the vanity of wretched fools!
Give us some seats. Come, cousin Angelo;
In this I'll be impartial; be you judge
Of your own cause. Is this the witness, friar?
First, let her show her face, and after speak.

MARIANA:
Pardon, my lord; I will not show my face
Until my husband bid me.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
What, are you married?

MARIANA:
No, my lord.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Are you a maid?

MARIANA:
No, my lord.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
A widow, then?

MARIANA:
Neither, my lord.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Why, you are nothing then: neither maid, widow, nor wife?

LUCIO:
My lord, she may be a punk; for many of them are
neither maid, widow, nor wife.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Silence that fellow: I would he had some cause
To prattle for himself.

LUCIO:
Well, my lord.

MARIANA:
My lord; I do confess I ne'er was married;
And I confess besides I am no maid:
I have known my husband; yet my husband
Knows not that ever he knew me.

LUCIO:
He was drunk then, my lord: it can be no better.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
For the benefit of silence, would thou wert so too!

LUCIO:
Well, my lord.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
This is no witness for Lord Angelo.

MARIANA:
Now I come to't my lord
She that accuses him of fornication,
In self-same manner doth accuse my husband,
And charges him my lord, with such a time
When I'll depose I had him in mine arms
With all the effect of love.

ANGELO:
Charges she more than me?

MARIANA:
Not that I know.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
No? you say your husband.

MARIANA:
Why, just, my lord, and that is Angelo,
Who thinks he knows that he ne'er knew my body,
But knows he thinks that he knows Isabel's.

ANGELO:
This is a strange abuse. Let's see thy face.

MARIANA:
My husband bids me; now I will unmask.
This is that face, thou cruel Angelo,
Which once thou sworest was worth the looking on;
This is the hand which, with a vow'd contract,
Was fast belock'd in thine; this is the body
That took away the match from Isabel,
And did supply thee at thy garden-house
In her imagined person.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Know you this woman?

LUCIO:
Carnally, she says.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Sirrah, no more!

LUCIO:
Enough, my lord.

ANGELO:
My lord, I must confess I know this woman:
And five years since there was some speech of marriage
Betwixt myself and her; which was broke off,
Partly for that her promised proportions
Came short of composition, but in chief
For that her reputation was disvalued
In levity: since which time of five years
I never spake with her, saw her, nor heard from her,
Upon my faith and honour.

MARIANA:
Noble prince,
As there comes light from heaven and words from breath,
As there is sense in truth and truth in virtue,
I am affianced this man's wife as strongly
As words could make up vows: and, my good lord,
But Tuesday night last gone in's garden-house
He knew me as a wife. As this is true,
Let me in safety raise me from my knees
Or else for ever be confixed here,
A marble monument!

ANGELO:
I did but smile till now:
Now, good my lord, give me the scope of justice
My patience here is touch'd. I do perceive
These poor informal women are no more
But instruments of some more mightier member
That sets them on: let me have way, my lord,
To find this practise out.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Ay, with my heart
And punish them to your height of pleasure.
Thou foolish friar, and thou pernicious woman,
Compact with her that's gone, think'st thou thy oaths,
Though they would swear down each particular saint,
Were testimonies against his worth and credit
That's seal'd in approbation? You, Lord Escalus,
Sit with my cousin; lend him your kind pains
To find out this abuse, whence 'tis derived.
There is another friar that set them on;
Let him be sent for.

FRIAR PETER:
Would he were here, my lord! for he indeed
Hath set the women on to this complaint:
Your provost knows the place where he abides
And he may fetch him.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Go do it instantly.
And you, my noble and well-warranted cousin,
Whom it concerns to hear this matter forth,
Do with your injuries as seems you best,
In any chastisement: I for a while will leave you;
But stir not you till you have well determined
Upon these slanderers.

ESCALUS:
My lord, we'll do it throughly.
Signior Lucio, did not you say you knew that
Friar Lodowick to be a dishonest person?

LUCIO:
'Cucullus non facit monachum:' honest in nothing
but in his clothes; and one that hath spoke most
villanous speeches of the duke.

ESCALUS:
We shall entreat you to abide here till he come and
enforce them against him: we shall find this friar a
notable fellow.

LUCIO:
As any in Vienna, on my word.

ESCALUS:
Call that same Isabel here once again; I would speak with her.
Pray you, my lord, give me leave to question; you
shall see how I'll handle her.

LUCIO:
Not better than he, by her own report.

ESCALUS:
Say you?

LUCIO:
Marry, sir, I think, if you handled her privately,
she would sooner confess: perchance, publicly,
she'll be ashamed.

ESCALUS:
I will go darkly to work with her.

LUCIO:
That's the way; for women are light at midnight.

ESCALUS:
Come on, mistress: here's a gentlewoman denies all
that you have said.

LUCIO:
My lord, here comes the rascal I spoke of; here with
the provost.

ESCALUS:
In very good time: speak not you to him till we
call upon you.

LUCIO:
Mum.

ESCALUS:
Come, sir: did you set these women on to slander
Lord Angelo? they have confessed you did.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
'Tis false.

ESCALUS:
How! know you where you are?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Respect to your great place! and let the devil
Be sometime honour'd for his burning throne!
Where is the duke? 'tis he should hear me speak.

ESCALUS:
The duke's in us; and we will hear you speak:
Look you speak justly.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Boldly, at least. But, O, poor souls,
Come you to seek the lamb here of the fox?
Good night to your redress! Is the duke gone?
Then is your cause gone too. The duke's unjust,
Thus to retort your manifest appeal,
And put your trial in the villain's mouth
Which here you come to accuse.

LUCIO:
This is the rascal; this is he I spoke of.

ESCALUS:
Why, thou unreverend and unhallow'd friar,
Is't not enough thou hast suborn'd these women
To accuse this worthy man, but, in foul mouth
And in the witness of his proper ear,
To call him villain? and then to glance from him
To the duke himself, to tax him with injustice?
Take him hence; to the rack with him! We'll touse you
Joint by joint, but we will know his purpose.
What 'unjust'!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Be not so hot; the duke
Dare no more stretch this finger of mine than he
Dare rack his own: his subject am I not,
Nor here provincial. My business in this state
Made me a looker on here in Vienna,
Where I have seen corruption boil and bubble
Till it o'er-run the stew; laws for all faults,
But faults so countenanced, that the strong statutes
Stand like the forfeits in a barber's shop,
As much in mock as mark.

ESCALUS:
Slander to the state! Away with him to prison!

ANGELO:
What can you vouch against him, Signior Lucio?
Is this the man that you did tell us of?

LUCIO:
'Tis he, my lord. Come hither, goodman baldpate:
do you know me?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I remember you, sir, by the sound of your voice: I
met you at the prison, in the absence of the duke.

LUCIO:
O, did you so? And do you remember what you said of the duke?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Most notedly, sir.

LUCIO:
Do you so, sir? And was the duke a fleshmonger, a
fool, and a coward, as you then reported him to be?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
You must, sir, change persons with me, ere you make
that my report: you, indeed, spoke so of him; and
much more, much worse.

LUCIO:
O thou damnable fellow! Did not I pluck thee by the
nose for thy speeches?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I protest I love the duke as I love myself.

ANGELO:
Hark, how the villain would close now, after his
treasonable abuses!

ESCALUS:
Such a fellow is not to be talked withal. Away with
him to prison! Where is the provost? Away with him
to prison! lay bolts enough upon him: let him
speak no more. Away with those giglots too, and
with the other confederate companion!

DUKE VINCENTIO:

ANGELO:
What, resists he? Help him, Lucio.

LUCIO:
Come, sir; come, sir; come, sir; foh, sir! Why, you
bald-pated, lying rascal, you must be hooded, must
you? Show your knave's visage, with a pox to you!
show your sheep-biting face, and be hanged an hour!
Will't not off?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Thou art the first knave that e'er madest a duke.
First, provost, let me bail these gentle three.
Sneak not away, sir; for the friar and you
Must have a word anon. Lay hold on him.

LUCIO:
This may prove worse than hanging.

DUKE VINCENTIO:

ANGELO:
O my dread lord,
I should be guiltier than my guiltiness,
To think I can be undiscernible,
When I perceive your grace, like power divine,
Hath look'd upon my passes. Then, good prince,
No longer session hold upon my shame,
But let my trial be mine own confession:
Immediate sentence then and sequent death
Is all the grace I beg.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Come hither, Mariana.
Say, wast thou e'er contracted to this woman?

ANGELO:
I was, my lord.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Go take her hence, and marry her instantly.
Do you the office, friar; which consummate,
Return him here again. Go with him, provost.

ESCALUS:
My lord, I am more amazed at his dishonour
Than at the strangeness of it.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Come hither, Isabel.
Your friar is now your prince: as I was then
Advertising and holy to your business,
Not changing heart with habit, I am still
Attorney'd at your service.

ISABELLA:
O, give me pardon,
That I, your vassal, have employ'd and pain'd
Your unknown sovereignty!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
You are pardon'd, Isabel:
And now, dear maid, be you as free to us.
Your brother's death, I know, sits at your heart;
And you may marvel why I obscured myself,
Labouring to save his life, and would not rather
Make rash remonstrance of my hidden power
Than let him so be lost. O most kind maid,
It was the swift celerity of his death,
Which I did think with slower foot came on,
That brain'd my purpose. But, peace be with him!
That life is better life, past fearing death,
Than that which lives to fear: make it your comfort,
So happy is your brother.

ISABELLA:
I do, my lord.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
For this new-married man approaching here,
Whose salt imagination yet hath wrong'd
Your well defended honour, you must pardon
For Mariana's sake: but as he adjudged your brother,--
Being criminal, in double violation
Of sacred chastity and of promise-breach
Thereon dependent, for your brother's life,--
The very mercy of the law cries out
Most audible, even from his proper tongue,
'An Angelo for Claudio, death for death!'
Haste still pays haste, and leisure answers leisure;
Like doth quit like, and MEASURE still FOR MEASURE.
Then, Angelo, thy fault's thus manifested;


--- End of file: shakespear_17.txt ---

Which, though thou wouldst deny, denies thee vantage.
We do condemn thee to the very block
Where Claudio stoop'd to death, and with like haste.
Away with him!

MARIANA:
O my most gracious lord,
I hope you will not mock me with a husband.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
It is your husband mock'd you with a husband.
Consenting to the safeguard of your honour,
I thought your marriage fit; else imputation,
For that he knew you, might reproach your life
And choke your good to come; for his possessions,
Although by confiscation they are ours,
We do instate and widow you withal,
To buy you a better husband.

MARIANA:
O my dear lord,
I crave no other, nor no better man.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Never crave him; we are definitive.

MARIANA:
Gentle my liege,--

DUKE VINCENTIO:
You do but lose your labour.
Away with him to death!
Now, sir, to you.

MARIANA:
O my good lord! Sweet Isabel, take my part;
Lend me your knees, and all my life to come
I'll lend you all my life to do you service.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Against all sense you do importune her:
Should she kneel down in mercy of this fact,
Her brother's ghost his paved bed would break,
And take her hence in horror.

MARIANA:
Isabel,
Sweet Isabel, do yet but kneel by me;
Hold up your hands, say nothing; I'll speak all.
They say, best men are moulded out of faults;
And, for the most, become much more the better
For being a little bad: so may my husband.
O Isabel, will you not lend a knee?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
He dies for Claudio's death.

ISABELLA:
Most bounteous sir,
Look, if it please you, on this man condemn'd,
As if my brother lived: I partly think
A due sincerity govern'd his deeds,
Till he did look on me: since it is so,
Let him not die. My brother had but justice,
In that he did the thing for which he died:
For Angelo,
His act did not o'ertake his bad intent,
And must be buried but as an intent
That perish'd by the way: thoughts are no subjects;
Intents but merely thoughts.

MARIANA:
Merely, my lord.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Your suit's unprofitable; stand up, I say.
I have bethought me of another fault.
Provost, how came it Claudio was beheaded
At an unusual hour?

Provost:
It was commanded so.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Had you a special warrant for the deed?

Provost:
No, my good lord; it was by private message.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
For which I do discharge you of your office:
Give up your keys.

Provost:
Pardon me, noble lord:
I thought it was a fault, but knew it not;
Yet did repent me, after more advice;
For testimony whereof, one in the prison,
That should by private order else have died,
I have reserved alive.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
What's he?

Provost:
His name is Barnardine.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I would thou hadst done so by Claudio.
Go fetch him hither; let me look upon him.

ESCALUS:
I am sorry, one so learned and so wise
As you, Lord Angelo, have still appear'd,
Should slip so grossly, both in the heat of blood.
And lack of temper'd judgment afterward.

ANGELO:
I am sorry that such sorrow I procure:
And so deep sticks it in my penitent heart
That I crave death more willingly than mercy;
'Tis my deserving, and I do entreat it.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Which is that Barnardine?

Provost:
This, my lord.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
There was a friar told me of this man.
Sirrah, thou art said to have a stubborn soul.
That apprehends no further than this world,
And squarest thy life according. Thou'rt condemn'd:
But, for those earthly faults, I quit them all;
And pray thee take this mercy to provide
For better times to come. Friar, advise him;
I leave him to your hand. What muffled fellow's that?

Provost:
This is another prisoner that I saved.
Who should have died when Claudio lost his head;
As like almost to Claudio as himself.

DUKE VINCENTIO:

LUCIO:
'Faith, my lord. I spoke it but according to the
trick. If you will hang me for it, you may; but I
had rather it would please you I might be whipt.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Whipt first, sir, and hanged after.
Proclaim it, provost, round about the city.
Is any woman wrong'd by this lewd fellow,
As I have heard him swear himself there's one
Whom he begot with child, let her appear,
And he shall marry her: the nuptial finish'd,
Let him be whipt and hang'd.

LUCIO:
I beseech your highness, do not marry me to a whore.
Your highness said even now, I made you a duke:
good my lord, do not recompense me in making me a cuckold.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Upon mine honour, thou shalt marry her.
Thy slanders I forgive; and therewithal
Remit thy other forfeits. Take him to prison;
And see our pleasure herein executed.

LUCIO:
Marrying a punk, my lord, is pressing to death,
whipping, and hanging.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Slandering a prince deserves it.
She, Claudio, that you wrong'd, look you restore.
Joy to you, Mariana! Love her, Angelo:
I have confess'd her and I know her virtue.
Thanks, good friend Escalus, for thy much goodness:
There's more behind that is more gratulate.
Thanks, provost, for thy care and secrecy:
We shill employ thee in a worthier place.
Forgive him, Angelo, that brought you home
The head of Ragozine for Claudio's:
The offence pardons itself. Dear Isabel,
I have a motion much imports your good;
Whereto if you'll a willing ear incline,
What's mine is yours and what is yours is mine.
So, bring us to our palace; where we'll show
What's yet behind, that's meet you all should know.

SLY:
I'll pheeze you, in faith.

Hostess:
A pair of stocks, you rogue!

SLY:
Ye are a baggage: the Slys are no rogues; look in
the chronicles; we came in with Richard Conqueror.
Therefore paucas pallabris; let the world slide: sessa!

Hostess:
You will not pay for the glasses you have burst?

SLY:
No, not a denier. Go by, Jeronimy: go to thy cold
bed, and warm thee.

Hostess:
I know my remedy; I must go fetch the
third--borough.

SLY:
Third, or fourth, or fifth borough, I'll answer him
by law: I'll not budge an inch, boy: let him come,
and kindly.

Lord:
Huntsman, I charge thee, tender well my hounds:
Brach Merriman, the poor cur is emboss'd;
And couple Clowder with the deep--mouth'd brach.
Saw'st thou not, boy, how Silver made it good
At the hedge-corner, in the coldest fault?
I would not lose the dog for twenty pound.

First Huntsman:
Why, Belman is as good as he, my lord;
He cried upon it at the merest loss
And twice to-day pick'd out the dullest scent:
Trust me, I take him for the better dog.

Lord:
Thou art a fool: if Echo were as fleet,
I would esteem him worth a dozen such.
But sup them well and look unto them all:
To-morrow I intend to hunt again.

First Huntsman:
I will, my lord.

Lord:
What's here? one dead, or drunk? See, doth he breathe?

Second Huntsman:
He breathes, my lord. Were he not warm'd with ale,
This were a bed but cold to sleep so soundly.

Lord:
O monstrous beast! how like a swine he lies!
Grim death, how foul and loathsome is thine image!
Sirs, I will practise on this drunken man.
What think you, if he were convey'd to bed,
Wrapp'd in sweet clothes, rings put upon his fingers,
A most delicious banquet by his bed,
And brave attendants near him when he wakes,
Would not the beggar then forget himself?

First Huntsman:
Believe me, lord, I think he cannot choose.

Second Huntsman:
It would seem strange unto him when he waked.

Lord:
Even as a flattering dream or worthless fancy.
Then take him up and manage well the jest:
Carry him gently to my fairest chamber
And hang it round with all my wanton pictures:
Balm his foul head in warm distilled waters
And burn sweet wood to make the lodging sweet:
Procure me music ready when he wakes,
To make a dulcet and a heavenly sound;
And if he chance to speak, be ready straight
And with a low submissive reverence
Say 'What is it your honour will command?'
Let one attend him with a silver basin
Full of rose-water and bestrew'd with flowers,
Another bear the ewer, the third a diaper,
And say 'Will't please your lordship cool your hands?'
Some one be ready with a costly suit
And ask him what apparel he will wear;
Another tell him of his hounds and horse,
And that his lady mourns at his disease:
Persuade him that he hath been lunatic;
And when he says he is, say that he dreams,
For he is nothing but a mighty lord.
This do and do it kindly, gentle sirs:
It will be pastime passing excellent,
If it be husbanded with modesty.

First Huntsman:
My lord, I warrant you we will play our part,
As he shall think by our true diligence
He is no less than what we say he is.

Lord:
Take him up gently and to bed with him;
And each one to his office when he wakes.
Sirrah, go see what trumpet 'tis that sounds:
Belike, some noble gentleman that means,
Travelling some journey, to repose him here.
How now! who is it?

Servant:
An't please your honour, players
That offer service to your lordship.

Lord:
Bid them come near.
Now, fellows, you are welcome.

Players:
We thank your honour.

Lord:
Do you intend to stay with me tonight?

A Player:
So please your lordship to accept our duty.

Lord:
With all my heart. This fellow I remember,
Since once he play'd a farmer's eldest son:
'Twas where you woo'd the gentlewoman so well:
I have forgot your name; but, sure, that part
Was aptly fitted and naturally perform'd.

A Player:
I think 'twas Soto that your honour means.

Lord:
'Tis very true: thou didst it excellent.
Well, you are come to me in a happy time;
The rather for I have some sport in hand
Wherein your cunning can assist me much.
There is a lord will hear you play to-night:
But I am doubtful of your modesties;
Lest over-eyeing of his odd behavior,--
For yet his honour never heard a play--
You break into some merry passion
And so offend him; for I tell you, sirs,
If you should smile he grows impatient.

A Player:
Fear not, my lord: we can contain ourselves,
Were he the veriest antic in the world.

Lord:
Go, sirrah, take them to the buttery,
And give them friendly welcome every one:
Let them want nothing that my house affords.
Sirrah, go you to Barthol'mew my page,
And see him dress'd in all suits like a lady:
That done, conduct him to the drunkard's chamber;
And call him 'madam,' do him obeisance.
Tell him from me, as he will win my love,
He bear himself with honourable action,
Such as he hath observed in noble ladies
Unto their lords, by them accomplished:
Such duty to the drunkard let him do
With soft low tongue and lowly courtesy,
And say 'What is't your honour will command,
Wherein your lady and your humble wife
May show her duty and make known her love?'
And then with kind embracements, tempting kisses,
And with declining head into his bosom,
Bid him shed tears, as being overjoy'd
To see her noble lord restored to health,
Who for this seven years hath esteem'd him
No better than a poor and loathsome beggar:
And if the boy have not a woman's gift
To rain a shower of commanded tears,
An onion will do well for such a shift,
Which in a napkin being close convey'd
Shall in despite enforce a watery eye.
See this dispatch'd with all the haste thou canst:
Anon I'll give thee more instructions.
I know the boy will well usurp the grace,
Voice, gait and action of a gentlewoman:
I long to hear him call the drunkard husband,
And how my men will stay themselves from laughter
When they do homage to this simple peasant.
I'll in to counsel them; haply my presence
May well abate the over-merry spleen
Which otherwise would grow into extremes.

SLY:
For God's sake, a pot of small ale.

First Servant:
Will't please your lordship drink a cup of sack?

Second Servant:
Will't please your honour taste of these conserves?

Third Servant:
What raiment will your honour wear to-day?

SLY:
I am Christophero Sly; call not me 'honour' nor
'lordship:' I ne'er drank sack in my life; and if
you give me any conserves, give me conserves of
beef: ne'er ask me what raiment I'll wear; for I
have no more doublets than backs, no more stockings
than legs, nor no more shoes than feet; nay,
sometimes more feet than shoes, or such shoes as my
toes look through the over-leather.

Lord:
Heaven cease this idle humour in your honour!
O, that a mighty man of such descent,
Of such possessions and so high esteem,
Should be infused with so foul a spirit!

SLY:
What, would you make me mad? Am not I Christopher
Sly, old Sly's son of Burtonheath, by birth a
pedlar, by education a cardmaker, by transmutation a
bear-herd, and now by present profession a tinker?
Ask Marian Hacket, the fat ale-wife of Wincot, if
she know me not: if she say I am not fourteen pence
on the score for sheer ale, score me up for the
lyingest knave in Christendom. What! I am not
bestraught: here's--

Third Servant:
O, this it is that makes your lady mourn!

Second Servant:
O, this is it that makes your servants droop!

Lord:
Hence comes it that your kindred shuns your house,
As beaten hence by your strange lunacy.
O noble lord, bethink thee of thy birth,
Call home thy ancient thoughts from banishment
And banish hence these abject lowly dreams.
Look how thy servants do attend on thee,
Each in his office ready at thy beck.
Wilt thou have music? hark! Apollo plays,
And twenty caged nightingales do sing:
Or wilt thou sleep? we'll have thee to a couch
Softer and sweeter than the lustful bed
On purpose trimm'd up for Semiramis.
Say thou wilt walk; we will bestrew the ground:
Or wilt thou ride? thy horses shall be trapp'd,
Their harness studded all with gold and pearl.
Dost thou love hawking? thou hast hawks will soar
Above the morning lark or wilt thou hunt?
Thy hounds shall make the welkin answer them
And fetch shrill echoes from the hollow earth.

First Servant:
Say thou wilt course; thy greyhounds are as swift
As breathed stags, ay, fleeter than the roe.

Second Servant:
Dost thou love pictures? we will fetch thee straight
Adonis painted by a running brook,
And Cytherea all in sedges hid,
Which seem to move and wanton with her breath,
Even as the waving sedges play with wind.

Lord:
We'll show thee Io as she was a maid,
And how she was beguiled and surprised,
As lively painted as the deed was done.

Third Servant:
Or Daphne roaming through a thorny wood,
Scratching her legs that one shall swear she bleeds,
And at that sight shall sad Apollo weep,
So workmanly the blood and tears are drawn.

Lord:
Thou art a lord, and nothing but a lord:
Thou hast a lady far more beautiful
Than any woman in this waning age.

First Servant:
And till the tears that she hath shed for thee
Like envious floods o'er-run her lovely face,
She was the fairest creature in the world;
And yet she is inferior to none.

SLY:
Am I a lord? and have I such a lady?
Or do I dream? or have I dream'd till now?
I do not sleep: I see, I hear, I speak;
I smell sweet savours and I feel soft things:
Upon my life, I am a lord indeed
And not a tinker nor Christophero Sly.
Well, bring our lady hither to our sight;
And once again, a pot o' the smallest ale.

Second Servant:
Will't please your mightiness to wash your hands?
O, how we joy to see your wit restored!
O, that once more you knew but what you are!
These fifteen years you have been in a dream;
Or when you waked, so waked as if you slept.

SLY:
These fifteen years! by my fay, a goodly nap.
But did I never speak of all that time?

First Servant:
O, yes, my lord, but very idle words:
For though you lay here in this goodly chamber,
Yet would you say ye were beaten out of door;
And rail upon the hostess of the house;
And say you would present her at the leet,
Because she brought stone jugs and no seal'd quarts:
Sometimes you would call out for Cicely Hacket.

SLY:
Ay, the woman's maid of the house.

Third Servant:
Why, sir, you know no house nor no such maid,
Nor no such men as you have reckon'd up,
As Stephen Sly and did John Naps of Greece
And Peter Turph and Henry Pimpernell
And twenty more such names and men as these
Which never were nor no man ever saw.

SLY:
Now Lord be thanked for my good amends!

ALL:
Amen.

SLY:
I thank thee: thou shalt not lose by it.

Page:
How fares my noble lord?

SLY:
Marry, I fare well for here is cheer enough.
Where is my wife?

Page:
Here, noble lord: what is thy will with her?

SLY:
Are you my wife and will not call me husband?
My men should call me 'lord:' I am your goodman.

Page:
My husband and my lord, my lord and husband;
I am your wife in all obedience.

SLY:
I know it well. What must I call her?

Lord:
Madam.

SLY:
Al'ce madam, or Joan madam?

Lord:
'Madam,' and nothing else: so lords
call ladies.

SLY:
Madam wife, they say that I have dream'd
And slept above some fifteen year or more.

Page:
Ay, and the time seems thirty unto me,
Being all this time abandon'd from your bed.

SLY:
'Tis much. Servants, leave me and her alone.
Madam, undress you and come now to bed.

Page:
Thrice noble lord, let me entreat of you
To pardon me yet for a night or two,
Or, if not so, until the sun be set:
For your physicians have expressly charged,
In peril to incur your former malady,
That I should yet absent me from your bed:
I hope this reason stands for my excuse.

SLY:
Ay, it stands so that I may hardly
tarry so long. But I would be loath to fall into
my dreams again: I will therefore tarry in
despite of the flesh and the blood.

Messenger:
Your honour's players, heating your amendment,
Are come to play a pleasant comedy;
For so your doctors hold it very meet,
Seeing too much sadness hath congeal'd your blood,
And melancholy is the nurse of frenzy:
Therefore they thought it good you hear a play
And frame your mind to mirth and merriment,
Which bars a thousand harms and lengthens life.

SLY:
Marry, I will, let them play it. Is not a
comondy a Christmas gambold or a tumbling-trick?

Page:
No, my good lord; it is more pleasing stuff.

SLY:
What, household stuff?

Page:
It is a kind of history.

SLY:
Well, well see't. Come, madam wife, sit by my side
and let the world slip: we shall ne'er be younger.

LUCENTIO:
Tranio, since for the great desire I had
To see fair Padua, nursery of arts,
I am arrived for fruitful Lombardy,
The pleasant garden of great Italy;
And by my father's love and leave am arm'd
With his good will and thy good company,
My trusty servant, well approved in all,
Here let us breathe and haply institute
A course of learning and ingenious studies.
Pisa renown'd for grave citizens
Gave me my being and my father first,
A merchant of great traffic through the world,
Vincetino come of Bentivolii.
Vincetino's son brought up in Florence
It shall become to serve all hopes conceived,
To deck his fortune with his virtuous deeds:
And therefore, Tranio, for the time I study,
Virtue and that part of philosophy
Will I apply that treats of happiness
By virtue specially to be achieved.
Tell me thy mind; for I have Pisa left
And am to Padua come, as he that leaves
A shallow plash to plunge him in the deep
And with satiety seeks to quench his thirst.

TRANIO:
Mi perdonato, gentle master mine,
I am in all affected as yourself;
Glad that you thus continue your resolve
To suck the sweets of sweet philosophy.
Only, good master, while we do admire
This virtue and this moral discipline,
Let's be no stoics nor no stocks, I pray;
Or so devote to Aristotle's cheques
As Ovid be an outcast quite abjured:
Balk logic with acquaintance that you have
And practise rhetoric in your common talk;
Music and poesy use to quicken you;
The mathematics and the metaphysics,
Fall to them as you find your stomach serves you;
No profit grows where is no pleasure ta'en:
In brief, sir, study what you most affect.

LUCENTIO:
Gramercies, Tranio, well dost thou advise.
If, Biondello, thou wert come ashore,
We could at once put us in readiness,
And take a lodging fit to entertain
Such friends as time in Padua shall beget.
But stay a while: what company is this?

TRANIO:
Master, some show to welcome us to town.

BAPTISTA:
Gentlemen, importune me no farther,
For how I firmly am resolved you know;
That is, not bestow my youngest daughter
Before I have a husband for the elder:
If either of you both love Katharina,
Because I know you well and love you well,
Leave shall you have to court her at your pleasure.

GREMIO:

KATHARINA:
I pray you, sir, is it your will
To make a stale of me amongst these mates?

HORTENSIO:
Mates, maid! how mean you that? no mates for you,
Unless you were of gentler, milder mould.

KATHARINA:
I'faith, sir, you shall never need to fear:
I wis it is not half way to her heart;
But if it were, doubt not her care should be
To comb your noddle with a three-legg'd stool
And paint your face and use you like a fool.

HORTENSIA:
From all such devils, good Lord deliver us!

GREMIO:
And me too, good Lord!

TRANIO:
Hush, master! here's some good pastime toward:
That wench is stark mad or wonderful froward.

LUCENTIO:
But in the other's silence do I see
Maid's mild behavior and sobriety.
Peace, Tranio!

TRANIO:
Well said, master; mum! and gaze your fill.

BAPTISTA:
Gentlemen, that I may soon make good
What I have said, Bianca, get you in:
And let it not displease thee, good Bianca,
For I will love thee ne'er the less, my girl.

KATHARINA:
A pretty peat! it is best
Put finger in the eye, an she knew why.

BIANCA:
Sister, content you in my discontent.
Sir, to your pleasure humbly I subscribe:
My books and instruments shall be my company,
On them to took and practise by myself.

LUCENTIO:
Hark, Tranio! thou may'st hear Minerva speak.

HORTENSIO:
Signior Baptista, will you be so strange?
Sorry am I that our good will effects
Bianca's grief.

GREMIO:
Why will you mew her up,
Signior Baptista, for this fiend of hell,
And make her bear the penance of her tongue?

BAPTISTA:
Gentlemen, content ye; I am resolved:
Go in, Bianca:
And for I know she taketh most delight
In music, instruments and poetry,
Schoolmasters will I keep within my house,
Fit to instruct her youth. If you, Hortensio,
Or Signior Gremio, you, know any such,
Prefer them hither; for to cunning men
I will be very kind, and liberal
To mine own children in good bringing up:
And so farewell. Katharina, you may stay;
For I have more to commune with Bianca.

KATHARINA:
Why, and I trust I may go too, may I not? What,
shall I be appointed hours; as though, belike, I
knew not what to take and what to leave, ha?

GREMIO:
You may go to the devil's dam: your gifts are so
good, here's none will hold you. Their love is not
so great, Hortensio, but we may blow our nails
together, and fast it fairly out: our cakes dough on
both sides. Farewell: yet for the love I bear my
sweet Bianca, if I can by any means light on a fit
man to teach her that wherein she delights, I will
wish him to her father.

HORTENSIO:
So will I, Signior Gremio: but a word, I pray.
Though the nature of our quarrel yet never brooked
parle, know now, upon advice, it toucheth us both,
that we may yet again have access to our fair
mistress and be happy rivals in Bianco's love, to
labour and effect one thing specially.

GREMIO:
What's that, I pray?

HORTENSIO:
Marry, sir, to get a husband for her sister.

GREMIO:
A husband! a devil.

HORTENSIO:
I say, a husband.

GREMIO:
I say, a devil. Thinkest thou, Hortensio, though
her father be very rich, any man is so very a fool
to be married to hell?

HORTENSIO:
Tush, Gremio, though it pass your patience and mine
to endure her loud alarums, why, man, there be good
fellows in the world, an a man could light on them,
would take her with all faults, and money enough.

GREMIO:
I cannot tell; but I had as lief take her dowry with
this condition, to be whipped at the high cross
every morning.

HORTENSIO:
Faith, as you say, there's small choice in rotten
apples. But come; since this bar in law makes us
friends, it shall be so far forth friendly
maintained all by helping Baptista's eldest daughter
to a husband we set his youngest free for a husband,
and then have to't a fresh. Sweet Bianca! Happy man
be his dole! He that runs fastest gets the ring.
How say you, Signior Gremio?

GREMIO:
I am agreed; and would I had given him the best
horse in Padua to begin his wooing that would
thoroughly woo her, wed her and bed her and rid the
house of her! Come on.

TRANIO:
I pray, sir, tell me, is it possible
That love should of a sudden take such hold?

LUCENTIO:
O Tranio, till I found it to be true,
I never thought it possible or likely;
But see, while idly I stood looking on,
I found the effect of love in idleness:
And now in plainness do confess to thee,
That art to me as secret and as dear
As Anna to the queen of Carthage was,
Tranio, I burn, I pine, I perish, Tranio,
If I achieve not this young modest girl.
Counsel me, Tranio, for I know thou canst;
Assist me, Tranio, for I know thou wilt.

TRANIO:
Master, it is no time to chide you now;
Affection is not rated from the heart:
If love have touch'd you, nought remains but so,
'Redime te captum quam queas minimo.'

LUCENTIO:
Gramercies, lad, go forward; this contents:
The rest will comfort, for thy counsel's sound.

TRANIO:
Master, you look'd so longly on the maid,
Perhaps you mark'd not what's the pith of all.

LUCENTIO:
O yes, I saw sweet beauty in her face,
Such as the daughter of Agenor had,
That made great Jove to humble him to her hand.
When with his knees he kiss'd the Cretan strand.

TRANIO:
Saw you no more? mark'd you not how her sister
Began to scold and raise up such a storm
That mortal ears might hardly endure the din?

LUCENTIO:
Tranio, I saw her coral lips to move
And with her breath she did perfume the air:
Sacred and sweet was all I saw in her.

TRANIO:
Nay, then, 'tis time to stir him from his trance.
I pray, awake, sir: if you love the maid,
Bend thoughts and wits to achieve her. Thus it stands:
Her eldest sister is so curst and shrewd
That till the father rid his hands of her,
Master, your love must live a maid at home;
And therefore has he closely mew'd her up,
Because she will not be annoy'd with suitors.

LUCENTIO:
Ah, Tranio, what a cruel father's he!
But art thou not advised, he took some care
To get her cunning schoolmasters to instruct her?

TRANIO:
Ay, marry, am I, sir; and now 'tis plotted.

LUCENTIO:
I have it, Tranio.

TRANIO:
Master, for my hand,
Both our inventions meet and jump in one.

LUCENTIO:
Tell me thine first.

TRANIO:
You will be schoolmaster
And undertake the teaching of the maid:
That's your device.

LUCENTIO:
It is: may it be done?

TRANIO:
Not possible; for who shall bear your part,
And be in Padua here Vincentio's son,
Keep house and ply his book, welcome his friends,
Visit his countrymen and banquet them?

LUCENTIO:
Basta; content thee, for I have it full.
We have not yet been seen in any house,
Nor can we lie distinguish'd by our faces
For man or master; then it follows thus;
Thou shalt be master, Tranio, in my stead,
Keep house and port and servants as I should:
I will some other be, some Florentine,
Some Neapolitan, or meaner man of Pisa.
'Tis hatch'd and shall be so: Tranio, at once
Uncase thee; take my colour'd hat and cloak:
When Biondello comes, he waits on thee;
But I will charm him first to keep his tongue.

TRANIO:
So had you need.
In brief, sir, sith it your pleasure is,
And I am tied to be obedient;
For so your father charged me at our parting,
'Be serviceable to my son,' quoth he,
Although I think 'twas in another sense;
I am content to be Lucentio,
Because so well I love Lucentio.

LUCENTIO:
Tranio, be so, because Lucentio loves:
And let me be a slave, to achieve that maid
Whose sudden sight hath thrall'd my wounded eye.
Here comes the rogue.
Sirrah, where have you been?

BIONDELLO:
Where have I been! Nay, how now! where are you?
Master, has my fellow Tranio stolen your clothes? Or
you stolen his? or both? pray, what's the news?

LUCENTIO:
Sirrah, come hither: 'tis no time to jest,
And therefore frame your manners to the time.
Your fellow Tranio here, to save my life,
Puts my apparel and my countenance on,
And I for my escape have put on his;
For in a quarrel since I came ashore
I kill'd a man and fear I was descried:
Wait you on him, I charge you, as becomes,
While I make way from hence to save my life:
You understand me?

BIONDELLO:
I, sir! ne'er a whit.

LUCENTIO:
And not a jot of Tranio in your mouth:
Tranio is changed into Lucentio.

BIONDELLO:
The better for him: would I were so too!

TRANIO:
So could I, faith, boy, to have the next wish after,
That Lucentio indeed had Baptista's youngest daughter.
But, sirrah, not for my sake, but your master's, I advise
You use your manners discreetly in all kind of companies:
When I am alone, why, then I am Tranio;
But in all places else your master Lucentio.

LUCENTIO:
Tranio, let's go: one thing more rests, that
thyself execute, to make one among these wooers: if
thou ask me why, sufficeth, my reasons are both good
and weighty.

First Servant:
My lord, you nod; you do not mind the play.

SLY:
Yes, by Saint Anne, do I. A good matter, surely:
comes there any more of it?

Page:
My lord, 'tis but begun.

SLY:
'Tis a very excellent piece of work, madam lady:
would 'twere done!

PETRUCHIO:
Verona, for a while I take my leave,
To see my friends in Padua, but of all
My best beloved and approved friend,
Hortensio; and I trow this is his house.
Here, sirrah Grumio; knock, I say.

GRUMIO:
Knock, sir! whom should I knock? is there man has
rebused your worship?

PETRUCHIO:
Villain, I say, knock me here soundly.

GRUMIO:
Knock you here, sir! why, sir, what am I, sir, that
I should knock you here, sir?

PETRUCHIO:
Villain, I say, knock me at this gate
And rap me well, or I'll knock your knave's pate.

GRUMIO:
My master is grown quarrelsome. I should knock
you first,
And then I know after who comes by the worst.

PETRUCHIO:
Will it not be?
Faith, sirrah, an you'll not knock, I'll ring it;
I'll try how you can sol, fa, and sing it.

GRUMIO:
Help, masters, help! my master is mad.

PETRUCHIO:
Now, knock when I bid you, sirrah villain!

HORTENSIO:
How now! what's the matter? My old friend Grumio!
and my good friend Petruchio! How do you all at Verona?

PETRUCHIO:
Signior Hortensio, come you to part the fray?
'Con tutto il cuore, ben trovato,' may I say.

HORTENSIO:
'Alla nostra casa ben venuto, molto honorato signor
mio Petruchio.' Rise, Grumio, rise: we will compound
this quarrel.

GRUMIO:
Nay, 'tis no matter, sir, what he 'leges in Latin.
if this be not a lawful case for me to leave his
service, look you, sir, he bid me knock him and rap
him soundly, sir: well, was it fit for a servant to
use his master so, being perhaps, for aught I see,
two and thirty, a pip out? Whom would to God I had
well knock'd at first, Then had not Grumio come by the worst.

PETRUCHIO:
A senseless villain! Good Hortensio,
I bade the rascal knock upon your gate
And could not get him for my heart to do it.

GRUMIO:
Knock at the gate! O heavens! Spake you not these
words plain, 'Sirrah, knock me here, rap me here,
knock me well, and knock me soundly'? And come you
now with, 'knocking at the gate'?

PETRUCHIO:
Sirrah, be gone, or talk not, I advise you.

HORTENSIO:
Petruchio, patience; I am Grumio's pledge:
Why, this's a heavy chance 'twixt him and you,
Your ancient, trusty, pleasant servant Grumio.
And tell me now, sweet friend, what happy gale
Blows you to Padua here from old Verona?

PETRUCHIO:
Such wind as scatters young men through the world,
To seek their fortunes farther than at home
Where small experience grows. But in a few,
Signior Hortensio, thus it stands with me:
Antonio, my father, is deceased;
And I have thrust myself into this maze,
Haply to wive and thrive as best I may:
Crowns in my purse I have and goods at home,
And so am come abroad to see the world.

HORTENSIO:
Petruchio, shall I then come roundly to thee
And wish thee to a shrewd ill-favour'd wife?
Thou'ldst thank me but a little for my counsel:
And yet I'll promise thee she shall be rich
And very rich: but thou'rt too much my friend,
And I'll not wish thee to her.

PETRUCHIO:
Signior Hortensio, 'twixt such friends as we
Few words suffice; and therefore, if thou know
One rich enough to be Petruchio's wife,
As wealth is burden of my wooing dance,
Be she as foul as was Florentius' love,
As old as Sibyl and as curst and shrewd
As Socrates' Xanthippe, or a worse,
She moves me not, or not removes, at least,
Affection's edge in me, were she as rough
As are the swelling Adriatic seas:
I come to wive it wealthily in Padua;
If wealthily, then happily in Padua.

GRUMIO:
Nay, look you, sir, he tells you flatly what his
mind is: Why give him gold enough and marry him to
a puppet or an aglet-baby; or an old trot with ne'er
a tooth in her head, though she have as many diseases
as two and fifty horses: why, nothing comes amiss,
so money comes withal.

HORTENSIO:
Petruchio, since we are stepp'd thus far in,
I will continue that I broach'd in jest.
I can, Petruchio, help thee to a wife
With wealth enough and young and beauteous,
Brought up as best becomes a gentlewoman:
Her only fault, and that is faults enough,
Is that she is intolerable curst
And shrewd and froward, so beyond all measure
That, were my state far worser than it is,
I would not wed her for a mine of gold.

PETRUCHIO:
Hortensio, peace! thou know'st not gold's effect:
Tell me her father's name and 'tis enough;
For I will board her, though she chide as loud
As thunder when the clouds in autumn crack.

HORTENSIO:
Her father is Baptista Minola,
An affable and courteous gentleman:
Her name is Katharina Minola,
Renown'd in Padua for her scolding tongue.

PETRUCHIO:
I know her father, though I know not her;
And he knew my deceased father well.
I will not sleep, Hortensio, till I see her;
And therefore let me be thus bold with you
To give you over at this first encounter,
Unless you will accompany me thither.

GRUMIO:
I pray you, sir, let him go while the humour lasts.
O' my word, an she knew him as well as I do, she
would think scolding would do little good upon him:
she may perhaps call him half a score knaves or so:
why, that's nothing; an he begin once, he'll rail in
his rope-tricks. I'll tell you what sir, an she
stand him but a little, he will throw a figure in
her face and so disfigure her with it that she
shall have no more eyes to see withal than a cat.
You know him not, sir.

HORTENSIO:
Tarry, Petruchio, I must go with thee,
For in Baptista's keep my treasure is:
He hath the jewel of my life in hold,
His youngest daughter, beautiful Binaca,
And her withholds from me and other more,
Suitors to her and rivals in my love,
Supposing it a thing impossible,
For those defects I have before rehearsed,
That ever Katharina will be woo'd;
Therefore this order hath Baptista ta'en,
That none shall have access unto Bianca
Till Katharina the curst have got a husband.

GRUMIO:
Katharina the curst!
A title for a maid of all titles the worst.

HORTENSIO:
Now shall my friend Petruchio do me grace,
And offer me disguised in sober robes
To old Baptista as a schoolmaster
Well seen in music, to instruct Bianca;
That so I may, by this device, at least
Have leave and leisure to make love to her
And unsuspected court her by herself.

GRUMIO:
Here's no knavery! See, to beguile the old folks,
how the young folks lay their heads together!
Master, master, look about you: who goes there, ha?

HORTENSIO:
Peace, Grumio! it is the rival of my love.
Petruchio, stand by a while.

GRUMIO:
A proper stripling and an amorous!

GREMIO:
O, very well; I have perused the note.
Hark you, sir: I'll have them very fairly bound:
All books of love, see that at any hand;
And see you read no other lectures to her:
You understand me: over and beside
Signior Baptista's liberality,
I'll mend it with a largess. Take your paper too,
And let me have them very well perfumed
For she is sweeter than perfume itself
To whom they go to. What will you read to her?

LUCENTIO:
Whate'er I read to her, I'll plead for you
As for my patron, stand you so assured,
As firmly as yourself were still in place:
Yea, and perhaps with more successful words
Than you, unless you were a scholar, sir.

GREMIO:
O this learning, what a thing it is!

GRUMIO:
O this woodcock, what an ass it is!

PETRUCHIO:
Peace, sirrah!

HORTENSIO:
Grumio, mum! God save you, Signior Gremio.

GREMIO:
And you are well met, Signior Hortensio.
Trow you whither I am going? To Baptista Minola.
I promised to inquire carefully
About a schoolmaster for the fair Bianca:
And by good fortune I have lighted well
On this young man, for learning and behavior
Fit for her turn, well read in poetry
And other books, good ones, I warrant ye.

HORTENSIO:
'Tis well; and I have met a gentleman
Hath promised me to help me to another,
A fine musician to instruct our mistress;
So shall I no whit be behind in duty
To fair Bianca, so beloved of me.

GREMIO:
Beloved of me; and that my deeds shall prove.

GRUMIO:
And that his bags shall prove.

HORTENSIO:
Gremio, 'tis now no time to vent our love:
Listen to me, and if you speak me fair,
I'll tell you news indifferent good for either.
Here is a gentleman whom by chance I met,
Upon agreement from us to his liking,
Will undertake to woo curst Katharina,
Yea, and to marry her, if her dowry please.

GREMIO:
So said, so done, is well.
Hortensio, have you told him all her faults?

PETRUCHIO:
I know she is an irksome brawling scold:
If that be all, masters, I hear no harm.

GREMIO:
No, say'st me so, friend? What countryman?

PETRUCHIO:
Born in Verona, old Antonio's son:
My father dead, my fortune lives for me;
And I do hope good days and long to see.

GREMIO:
O sir, such a life, with such a wife, were strange!
But if you have a stomach, to't i' God's name:
You shall have me assisting you in all.
But will you woo this wild-cat?

PETRUCHIO:
Will I live?

GRUMIO:
Will he woo her? ay, or I'll hang her.

PETRUCHIO:
Why came I hither but to that intent?
Think you a little din can daunt mine ears?
Have I not in my time heard lions roar?
Have I not heard the sea puff'd up with winds
Rage like an angry boar chafed with sweat?
Have I not heard great ordnance in the field,
And heaven's artillery thunder in the skies?
Have I not in a pitched battle heard
Loud 'larums, neighing steeds, and trumpets' clang?
And do you tell me of a woman's tongue,
That gives not half so great a blow to hear
As will a chestnut in a farmer's fire?
Tush, tush! fear boys with bugs.

GRUMIO:
For he fears none.

GREMIO:
Hortensio, hark:
This gentleman is happily arrived,
My mind presumes, for his own good and ours.

HORTENSIO:
I promised we would be contributors
And bear his charging of wooing, whatsoe'er.

GREMIO:
And so we will, provided that he win her.

GRUMIO:
I would I were as sure of a good dinner.

TRANIO:
Gentlemen, God save you. If I may be bold,
Tell me, I beseech you, which is the readiest way
To the house of Signior Baptista Minola?

BIONDELLO:
He that has the two fair daughters: is't he you mean?

TRANIO:
Even he, Biondello.

GREMIO:
Hark you, sir; you mean not her to--

TRANIO:
Perhaps, him and her, sir: what have you to do?

PETRUCHIO:
Not her that chides, sir, at any hand, I pray.

TRANIO:
I love no chiders, sir. Biondello, let's away.

LUCENTIO:
Well begun, Tranio.

HORTENSIO:
Sir, a word ere you go;
Are you a suitor to the maid you talk of, yea or no?

TRANIO:
And if I be, sir, is it any offence?

GREMIO:
No; if without more words you will get you hence.

TRANIO:
Why, sir, I pray, are not the streets as free
For me as for you?

GREMIO:
But so is not she.

TRANIO:
For what reason, I beseech you?

GREMIO:
For this reason, if you'll know,
That she's the choice love of Signior Gremio.

HORTENSIO:
That she's the chosen of Signior Hortensio.

TRANIO:
Softly, my masters! if you be gentlemen,
Do me this right; hear me with patience.
Baptista is a noble gentleman,
To whom my father is not all unknown;
And were his daughter fairer than she is,
She may more suitors have and me for one.
Fair Leda's daughter had a thousand wooers;
Then well one more may fair Bianca have:
And so she shall; Lucentio shall make one,
Though Paris came in hope to speed alone.

GREMIO:
What! this gentleman will out-talk us all.

LUCENTIO:
Sir, give him head: I know he'll prove a jade.

PETRUCHIO:
Hortensio, to what end are all these words?

HORTENSIO:
Sir, let me be so bold as ask you,
Did you yet ever see Baptista's daughter?

TRANIO:
No, sir; but hear I do that he hath two,
The one as famous for a scolding tongue
As is the other for beauteous modesty.

PETRUCHIO:
Sir, sir, the first's for me; let her go by.

GREMIO:
Yea, leave that labour to great Hercules;
And let it be more than Alcides' twelve.

PETRUCHIO:
Sir, understand you this of me in sooth:
The youngest daughter whom you hearken for
Her father keeps from all access of suitors,
And will not promise her to any man
Until the elder sister first be wed:
The younger then is free and not before.

TRANIO:
If it be so, sir, that you are the man
Must stead us all and me amongst the rest,
And if you break the ice and do this feat,
Achieve the elder, set the younger free
For our access, whose hap shall be to have her
Will not so graceless be to be ingrate.

HORTENSIO:
Sir, you say well and well you do conceive;
And since you do profess to be a suitor,
You must, as we do, gratify this gentleman,
To whom we all rest generally beholding.

TRANIO:
Sir, I shall not be slack: in sign whereof,
Please ye we may contrive this afternoon,
And quaff carouses to our mistress' health,
And do as adversaries do in law,
Strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends.

GRUMIO:
O excellent motion! Fellows, let's be gone.

HORTENSIO:
The motion's good indeed and be it so,
Petruchio, I shall be your ben venuto.

BIANCA:
Good sister, wrong me not, nor wrong yourself,
To make a bondmaid and a slave of me;
That I disdain: but for these other gawds,
Unbind my hands, I'll pull them off myself,
Yea, all my raiment, to my petticoat;
Or what you will command me will I do,
So well I know my duty to my elders.

KATHARINA:
Of all thy suitors, here I charge thee, tell
Whom thou lovest best: see thou dissemble not.

BIANCA:
Believe me, sister, of all the men alive
I never yet beheld that special face
Which I could fancy more than any other.

KATHARINA:
Minion, thou liest. Is't not Hortensio?

BIANCA:
If you affect him, sister, here I swear
I'll plead for you myself, but you shall have
him.

KATHARINA:
O then, belike, you fancy riches more:
You will have Gremio to keep you fair.

BIANCA:
Is it for him you do envy me so?
Nay then you jest, and now I well perceive
You have but jested with me all this while:
I prithee, sister Kate, untie my hands.

KATHARINA:
If that be jest, then all the rest was so.

BAPTISTA:
Why, how now, dame! whence grows this insolence?
Bianca, stand aside. Poor girl! she weeps.
Go ply thy needle; meddle not with her.
For shame, thou helding of a devilish spirit,
Why dost thou wrong her that did ne'er wrong thee?
When did she cross thee with a bitter word?

KATHARINA:
Her silence flouts me, and I'll be revenged.

BAPTISTA:
What, in my sight? Bianca, get thee in.

KATHARINA:
What, will you not suffer me? Nay, now I see
She is your treasure, she must have a husband;
I must dance bare-foot on her wedding day
And for your love to her lead apes in hell.
Talk not to me: I will go sit and weep
Till I can find occasion of revenge.

BAPTISTA:
Was ever gentleman thus grieved as I?
But who comes here?

GREMIO:
Good morrow, neighbour Baptista.

BAPTISTA:
Good morrow, neighbour Gremio.
God save you, gentlemen!

PETRUCHIO:
And you, good sir! Pray, have you not a daughter
Call'd Katharina, fair and virtuous?

BAPTISTA:
I have a daughter, sir, called Katharina.

GREMIO:
You are too blunt: go to it orderly.

PETRUCHIO:
You wrong me, Signior Gremio: give me leave.
I am a gentleman of Verona, sir,
That, hearing of her beauty and her wit,
Her affability and bashful modesty,
Her wondrous qualities and mild behavior,
Am bold to show myself a forward guest
Within your house, to make mine eye the witness
Of that report which I so oft have heard.
And, for an entrance to my entertainment,
I do present you with a man of mine,
Cunning in music and the mathematics,
To instruct her fully in those sciences,
Whereof I know she is not ignorant:
Accept of him, or else you do me wrong:
His name is Licio, born in Mantua.

BAPTISTA:
You're welcome, sir; and he, for your good sake.
But for my daughter Katharina, this I know,
She is not for your turn, the more my grief.

PETRUCHIO:
I see you do not mean to part with her,
Or else you like not of my company.

BAPTISTA:
Mistake me not; I speak but as I find.
Whence are you, sir? what may I call your name?

PETRUCHIO:
Petruchio is my name; Antonio's son,
A man well known throughout all Italy.

BAPTISTA:
I know him well: you are welcome for his sake.

GREMIO:
Saving your tale, Petruchio, I pray,
Let us, that are poor petitioners, speak too:
Baccare! you are marvellous forward.

PETRUCHIO:
O, pardon me, Signior Gremio; I would fain be doing.

GREMIO:
I doubt it not, sir; but you will curse your
wooing. Neighbour, this is a gift very grateful, I am
sure of it. To express the like kindness, myself,
that have been more kindly beholding to you than
any, freely give unto you this young scholar,
that hath been long studying at Rheims; as cunning
in Greek, Latin, and other languages, as the other
in music and mathematics: his name is Cambio; pray,
accept his service.

BAPTISTA:
A thousand thanks, Signior Gremio.
Welcome, good Cambio.
But, gentle sir, methinks you walk like a stranger:
may I be so bold to know the cause of your coming?

TRANIO:
Pardon me, sir, the boldness is mine own,
That, being a stranger in this city here,
Do make myself a suitor to your daughter,
Unto Bianca, fair and virtuous.
Nor is your firm resolve unknown to me,
In the preferment of the eldest sister.
This liberty is all that I request,
That, upon knowledge of my parentage,
I may have welcome 'mongst the rest that woo
And free access and favour as the rest:
And, toward the education of your daughters,
I here bestow a simple instrument,
And this small packet of Greek and Latin books:
If you accept them, then their worth is great.

BAPTISTA:
Lucentio is your name; of whence, I pray?

TRANIO:
Of Pisa, sir; son to Vincentio.

BAPTISTA:
A mighty man of Pisa; by report
I know him well: you are very welcome, sir,
Take you the lute, and you the set of books;
You shall go see your pupils presently.
Holla, within!
Sirrah, lead these gentlemen
To my daughters; and tell them both,
These are their tutors: bid them use them well.
We will go walk a little in the orchard,
And then to dinner. You are passing welcome,
And so I pray you all to think yourselves.

PETRUCHIO:
Signior Baptista, my business asketh haste,
And every day I cannot come to woo.
You knew my father well, and in him me,
Left solely heir to all his lands and goods,
Which I have better'd rather than decreased:
Then tell me, if I get your daughter's love,
What dowry shall I have with her to wife?

BAPTISTA:
After my death the one half of my lands,
And in possession twenty thousand crowns.

PETRUCHIO:
And, for that dowry, I'll assure her of
Her widowhood, be it that she survive me,
In all my lands and leases whatsoever:
Let specialties be therefore drawn between us,
That covenants may be kept on either hand.

BAPTISTA:
Ay, when the special thing is well obtain'd,
That is, her love; for that is all in all.

PETRUCHIO:
Why, that is nothing: for I tell you, father,
I am as peremptory as she proud-minded;
And where two raging fires meet together
They do consume the thing that feeds their fury:
Though little fire grows great with little wind,
Yet extreme gusts will blow out fire and all:
So I to her and so she yields to me;
For I am rough and woo not like a babe.

BAPTISTA:
Well mayst thou woo, and happy be thy speed!
But be thou arm'd for some unhappy words.

PETRUCHIO:
Ay, to the proof; as mountains are for winds,
That shake not, though they blow perpetually.

BAPTISTA:
How now, my friend! why dost thou look so pale?

HORTENSIO:
For fear, I promise you, if I look pale.

BAPTISTA:
What, will my daughter prove a good musician?

HORTENSIO:
I think she'll sooner prove a soldier
Iron may hold with her, but never lutes.

BAPTISTA:
Why, then thou canst not break her to the lute?

HORTENSIO:
Why, no; for she hath broke the lute to me.
I did but tell her she mistook her frets,
And bow'd her hand to teach her fingering;
When, with a most impatient devilish spirit,
'Frets, call you these?' quoth she; 'I'll fume
with them:'
And, with that word, she struck me on the head,
And through the instrument my pate made way;
And there I stood amazed for a while,
As on a pillory, looking through the lute;
While she did call me rascal fiddler
And twangling Jack; with twenty such vile terms,
As had she studied to misuse me so.

PETRUCHIO:
Now, by the world, it is a lusty wench;
I love her ten times more than e'er I did:
O, how I long to have some chat with her!

BAPTISTA:
Well, go with me and be not so discomfited:
Proceed in practise with my younger daughter;
She's apt to learn and thankful for good turns.
Signior Petruchio, will you go with us,
Or shall I send my daughter Kate to you?

PETRUCHIO:
I pray you do.
I will attend her here,
And woo her with some spirit when she comes.
Say that she rail; why then I'll tell her plain
She sings as sweetly as a nightingale:
Say that she frown, I'll say she looks as clear
As morning roses newly wash'd with dew:
Say she be mute and will not speak a word;
Then I'll commend her volubility,
And say she uttereth piercing eloquence:
If she do bid me pack, I'll give her thanks,
As though she bid me stay by her a week:
If she deny to wed, I'll crave the day
When I shall ask the banns and when be married.
But here she comes; and now, Petruchio, speak.
Good morrow, Kate; for that's your name, I hear.

KATHARINA:
Well have you heard, but something hard of hearing:
They call me Katharina that do talk of me.

PETRUCHIO:
You lie, in faith; for you are call'd plain Kate,
And bonny Kate and sometimes Kate the curst;
But Kate, the prettiest Kate in Christendom
Kate of Kate Hall, my super-dainty Kate,
For dainties are all Kates, and therefore, Kate,
Take this of me, Kate of my consolation;
Hearing thy mildness praised in every town,
Thy virtues spoke of, and thy beauty sounded,
Yet not so deeply as to thee belongs,
Myself am moved to woo thee for my wife.

KATHARINA:
Moved! in good time: let him that moved you hither
Remove you hence: I knew you at the first
You were a moveable.

PETRUCHIO:
Why, what's a moveable?

KATHARINA:
A join'd-stool.

PETRUCHIO:
Thou hast hit it: come, sit on me.

KATHARINA:
Asses are made to bear, and so are you.

PETRUCHIO:
Women are made to bear, and so are you.

KATHARINA:
No such jade as you, if me you mean.

PETRUCHIO:
Alas! good Kate, I will not burden thee;
For, knowing thee to be but young and light--

KATHARINA:
Too light for such a swain as you to catch;
And yet as heavy as my weight should be.

PETRUCHIO:
Should be! should--buzz!

KATHARINA:
Well ta'en, and like a buzzard.

PETRUCHIO:
O slow-wing'd turtle! shall a buzzard take thee?

KATHARINA:
Ay, for a turtle, as he takes a buzzard.

PETRUCHIO:
Come, come, you wasp; i' faith, you are too angry.

KATHARINA:
If I be waspish, best beware my sting.

PETRUCHIO:
My remedy is then, to pluck it out.

KATHARINA:
Ay, if the fool could find it where it lies,

PETRUCHIO:
Who knows not where a wasp does
wear his sting? In his tail.

KATHARINA:
In his tongue.

PETRUCHIO:
Whose tongue?

KATHARINA:
Yours, if you talk of tails: and so farewell.

PETRUCHIO:
What, with my tongue in your tail? nay, come again,
Good Kate; I am a gentleman.

KATHARINA:
That I'll try.

PETRUCHIO:
I swear I'll cuff you, if you strike again.

KATHARINA:
So may you lose your arms:
If you strike me, you are no gentleman;
And if no gentleman, why then no arms.

PETRUCHIO:
A herald, Kate? O, put me in thy books!

KATHARINA:
What is your crest? a coxcomb?

PETRUCHIO:
A combless cock, so Kate will be my hen.

KATHARINA:
No cock of mine; you crow too like a craven.

PETRUCHIO:
Nay, come, Kate, come; you must not look so sour.

KATHARINA:
It is my fashion, when I see a crab.

PETRUCHIO:
Why, here's no crab; and therefore look not sour.

KATHARINA:
There is, there is.

PETRUCHIO:
Then show it me.

KATHARINA:
Had I a glass, I would.

PETRUCHIO:
What, you mean my face?

KATHARINA:
Well aim'd of such a young one.

PETRUCHIO:
Now, by Saint George, I am too young for you.

KATHARINA:
Yet you are wither'd.

PETRUCHIO:
'Tis with cares.

KATHARINA:
I care not.

PETRUCHIO:
Nay, hear you, Kate: in sooth you scape not so.

KATHARINA:
I chafe you, if I tarry: let me go.

PETRUCHIO:
No, not a whit: I find you passing gentle.
'Twas told me you were rough and coy and sullen,
And now I find report a very liar;
For thou are pleasant, gamesome, passing courteous,
But slow in speech, yet sweet as spring-time flowers:
Thou canst not frown, thou canst not look askance,
Nor bite the lip, as angry wenches will,
Nor hast thou pleasure to be cross in talk,
But thou with mildness entertain'st thy wooers,
With gentle conference, soft and affable.
Why does the world report that Kate doth limp?
O slanderous world! Kate like the hazel-twig
Is straight and slender and as brown in hue
As hazel nuts and sweeter than the kernels.
O, let me see thee walk: thou dost not halt.

KATHARINA:
Go, fool, and whom thou keep'st command.

PETRUCHIO:
Did ever Dian so become a grove
As Kate this chamber with her princely gait?
O, be thou Dian, and let her be Kate;
And then let Kate be chaste and Dian sportful!

KATHARINA:
Where did you study all this goodly speech?

PETRUCHIO:
It is extempore, from my mother-wit.

KATHARINA:
A witty mother! witless else her son.

PETRUCHIO:
Am I not wise?

KATHARINA:
Yes; keep you warm.

PETRUCHIO:
Marry, so I mean, sweet Katharina, in thy bed:
And therefore, setting all this chat aside,
Thus in plain terms: your father hath consented
That you shall be my wife; your dowry 'greed on;
And, Will you, nill you, I will marry you.
Now, Kate, I am a husband for your turn;
For, by this light, whereby I see thy beauty,
Thy beauty, that doth make me like thee well,
Thou must be married to no man but me;
For I am he am born to tame you Kate,
And bring you from a wild Kate to a Kate
Conformable as other household Kates.
Here comes your father: never make denial;
I must and will have Katharina to my wife.

BAPTISTA:
Now, Signior Petruchio, how speed you with my daughter?

PETRUCHIO:
How but well, sir? how but well?
It were impossible I should speed amiss.

BAPTISTA:
Why, how now, daughter Katharina! in your dumps?

KATHARINA:
Call you me daughter? now, I promise you
You have show'd a tender fatherly regard,
To wish me wed to one half lunatic;
A mad-cup ruffian and a swearing Jack,
That thinks with oaths to face the matter out.

PETRUCHIO:
Father, 'tis thus: yourself and all the world,
That talk'd of her, have talk'd amiss of her:
If she be curst, it is for policy,
For she's not froward, but modest as the dove;
She is not hot, but temperate as the morn;
For patience she will prove a second Grissel,
And Roman Lucrece for her chastity:
And to conclude, we have 'greed so well together,
That upon Sunday is the wedding-day.

KATHARINA:
I'll see thee hang'd on Sunday first.

GREMIO:
Hark, Petruchio; she says she'll see thee
hang'd first.

TRANIO:
Is this your speeding? nay, then, good night our part!

PETRUCHIO:
Be patient, gentlemen; I choose her for myself:
If she and I be pleased, what's that to you?
'Tis bargain'd 'twixt us twain, being alone,
That she shall still be curst in company.
I tell you, 'tis incredible to believe
How much she loves me: O, the kindest Kate!
She hung about my neck; and kiss on kiss


--- End of file: shakespear_18.txt ---

She vied so fast, protesting oath on oath,
That in a twink she won me to her love.
O, you are novices! 'tis a world to see,
How tame, when men and women are alone,
A meacock wretch can make the curstest shrew.
Give me thy hand, Kate: I will unto Venice,
To buy apparel 'gainst the wedding-day.
Provide the feast, father, and bid the guests;
I will be sure my Katharina shall be fine.

BAPTISTA:
I know not what to say: but give me your hands;
God send you joy, Petruchio! 'tis a match.

GREMIO:
Amen, say we: we will be witnesses.

PETRUCHIO:
Father, and wife, and gentlemen, adieu;
I will to Venice; Sunday comes apace:
We will have rings and things and fine array;
And kiss me, Kate, we will be married o'Sunday.

GREMIO:
Was ever match clapp'd up so suddenly?

BAPTISTA:
Faith, gentlemen, now I play a merchant's part,
And venture madly on a desperate mart.

TRANIO:
'Twas a commodity lay fretting by you:
'Twill bring you gain, or perish on the seas.

BAPTISTA:
The gain I seek is, quiet in the match.

GREMIO:
No doubt but he hath got a quiet catch.
But now, Baptists, to your younger daughter:
Now is the day we long have looked for:
I am your neighbour, and was suitor first.

TRANIO:
And I am one that love Bianca more
Than words can witness, or your thoughts can guess.

GREMIO:
Youngling, thou canst not love so dear as I.

TRANIO:
Graybeard, thy love doth freeze.

GREMIO:
But thine doth fry.
Skipper, stand back: 'tis age that nourisheth.

TRANIO:
But youth in ladies' eyes that flourisheth.

BAPTISTA:
Content you, gentlemen: I will compound this strife:
'Tis deeds must win the prize; and he of both
That can assure my daughter greatest dower
Shall have my Bianca's love.
Say, Signior Gremio, What can you assure her?

GREMIO:
First, as you know, my house within the city
Is richly furnished with plate and gold;
Basins and ewers to lave her dainty hands;
My hangings all of Tyrian tapestry;
In ivory coffers I have stuff'd my crowns;
In cypress chests my arras counterpoints,
Costly apparel, tents, and canopies,
Fine linen, Turkey cushions boss'd with pearl,
Valance of Venice gold in needlework,
Pewter and brass and all things that belong
To house or housekeeping: then, at my farm
I have a hundred milch-kine to the pail,
Sixscore fat oxen standing in my stalls,
And all things answerable to this portion.
Myself am struck in years, I must confess;
And if I die to-morrow, this is hers,
If whilst I live she will be only mine.

TRANIO:
That 'only' came well in. Sir, list to me:
I am my father's heir and only son:
If I may have your daughter to my wife,
I'll leave her houses three or four as good,
Within rich Pisa walls, as any one
Old Signior Gremio has in Padua;
Besides two thousand ducats by the year
Of fruitful land, all which shall be her jointure.
What, have I pinch'd you, Signior Gremio?

GREMIO:
Two thousand ducats by the year of land!
My land amounts not to so much in all:
That she shall have; besides an argosy
That now is lying in Marseilles' road.
What, have I choked you with an argosy?

TRANIO:
Gremio, 'tis known my father hath no less
Than three great argosies; besides two galliases,
And twelve tight galleys: these I will assure her,
And twice as much, whate'er thou offer'st next.

GREMIO:
Nay, I have offer'd all, I have no more;
And she can have no more than all I have:
If you like me, she shall have me and mine.

TRANIO:
Why, then the maid is mine from all the world,
By your firm promise: Gremio is out-vied.

BAPTISTA:
I must confess your offer is the best;
And, let your father make her the assurance,
She is your own; else, you must pardon me,
if you should die before him, where's her dower?

TRANIO:
That's but a cavil: he is old, I young.

GREMIO:
And may not young men die, as well as old?

BAPTISTA:
Well, gentlemen,
I am thus resolved: on Sunday next you know
My daughter Katharina is to be married:
Now, on the Sunday following, shall Bianca
Be bride to you, if you this assurance;
If not, Signior Gremio:
And so, I take my leave, and thank you both.

GREMIO:
Adieu, good neighbour.
Now I fear thee not:
Sirrah young gamester, your father were a fool
To give thee all, and in his waning age
Set foot under thy table: tut, a toy!
An old Italian fox is not so kind, my boy.

TRANIO:
A vengeance on your crafty wither'd hide!
Yet I have faced it with a card of ten.
'Tis in my head to do my master good:
I see no reason but supposed Lucentio
Must get a father, call'd 'supposed Vincentio;'
And that's a wonder: fathers commonly
Do get their children; but in this case of wooing,
A child shall get a sire, if I fail not of my cunning.

LUCENTIO:
Fiddler, forbear; you grow too forward, sir:
Have you so soon forgot the entertainment
Her sister Katharina welcomed you withal?

HORTENSIO:
But, wrangling pedant, this is
The patroness of heavenly harmony:
Then give me leave to have prerogative;
And when in music we have spent an hour,
Your lecture shall have leisure for as much.

LUCENTIO:
Preposterous ass, that never read so far
To know the cause why music was ordain'd!
Was it not to refresh the mind of man
After his studies or his usual pain?
Then give me leave to read philosophy,
And while I pause, serve in your harmony.

HORTENSIO:
Sirrah, I will not bear these braves of thine.

BIANCA:
Why, gentlemen, you do me double wrong,
To strive for that which resteth in my choice:
I am no breeching scholar in the schools;
I'll not be tied to hours nor 'pointed times,
But learn my lessons as I please myself.
And, to cut off all strife, here sit we down:
Take you your instrument, play you the whiles;
His lecture will be done ere you have tuned.

HORTENSIO:
You'll leave his lecture when I am in tune?

LUCENTIO:
That will be never: tune your instrument.

BIANCA:
Where left we last?

LUCENTIO:
Here, madam:
'Hic ibat Simois; hic est Sigeia tellus;
Hic steterat Priami regia celsa senis.'

BIANCA:
Construe them.

LUCENTIO:
'Hic ibat,' as I told you before, 'Simois,' I am
Lucentio, 'hic est,' son unto Vincentio of Pisa,
'Sigeia tellus,' disguised thus to get your love;
'Hic steterat,' and that Lucentio that comes
a-wooing, 'Priami,' is my man Tranio, 'regia,'
bearing my port, 'celsa senis,' that we might
beguile the old pantaloon.

HORTENSIO:
Madam, my instrument's in tune.

BIANCA:
Let's hear. O fie! the treble jars.

LUCENTIO:
Spit in the hole, man, and tune again.

BIANCA:
Now let me see if I can construe it: 'Hic ibat
Simois,' I know you not, 'hic est Sigeia tellus,' I
trust you not; 'Hic steterat Priami,' take heed
he hear us not, 'regia,' presume not, 'celsa senis,'
despair not.

HORTENSIO:
Madam, 'tis now in tune.

LUCENTIO:
All but the base.

HORTENSIO:
The base is right; 'tis the base knave that jars.
How fiery and forward our pedant is!
Now, for my life, the knave doth court my love:
Pedascule, I'll watch you better yet.

BIANCA:
In time I may believe, yet I mistrust.

LUCENTIO:
Mistrust it not: for, sure, AEacides
Was Ajax, call'd so from his grandfather.

BIANCA:
I must believe my master; else, I promise you,
I should be arguing still upon that doubt:
But let it rest. Now, Licio, to you:
Good masters, take it not unkindly, pray,
That I have been thus pleasant with you both.

HORTENSIO:
You may go walk, and give me leave a while:
My lessons make no music in three parts.

LUCENTIO:
Are you so formal, sir? well, I must wait,
And watch withal; for, but I be deceived,
Our fine musician groweth amorous.

HORTENSIO:
Madam, before you touch the instrument,
To learn the order of my fingering,
I must begin with rudiments of art;
To teach you gamut in a briefer sort,
More pleasant, pithy and effectual,
Than hath been taught by any of my trade:
And there it is in writing, fairly drawn.

BIANCA:
Why, I am past my gamut long ago.

HORTENSIO:
Yet read the gamut of Hortensio.

BIANCA:

Servant:
Mistress, your father prays you leave your books
And help to dress your sister's chamber up:
You know to-morrow is the wedding-day.

BIANCA:
Farewell, sweet masters both; I must be gone.

LUCENTIO:
Faith, mistress, then I have no cause to stay.

HORTENSIO:
But I have cause to pry into this pedant:
Methinks he looks as though he were in love:
Yet if thy thoughts, Bianca, be so humble
To cast thy wandering eyes on every stale,
Seize thee that list: if once I find thee ranging,
Hortensio will be quit with thee by changing.

BAPTISTA:

KATHARINA:
No shame but mine: I must, forsooth, be forced
To give my hand opposed against my heart
Unto a mad-brain rudesby full of spleen;
Who woo'd in haste and means to wed at leisure.
I told you, I, he was a frantic fool,
Hiding his bitter jests in blunt behavior:
And, to be noted for a merry man,
He'll woo a thousand, 'point the day of marriage,
Make feasts, invite friends, and proclaim the banns;
Yet never means to wed where he hath woo'd.
Now must the world point at poor Katharina,
And say, 'Lo, there is mad Petruchio's wife,
If it would please him come and marry her!'

TRANIO:
Patience, good Katharina, and Baptista too.
Upon my life, Petruchio means but well,
Whatever fortune stays him from his word:
Though he be blunt, I know him passing wise;
Though he be merry, yet withal he's honest.

KATHARINA:
Would Katharina had never seen him though!

BAPTISTA:
Go, girl; I cannot blame thee now to weep;
For such an injury would vex a very saint,
Much more a shrew of thy impatient humour.

BIONDELLO:
Master, master! news, old news, and such news as
you never heard of!

BAPTISTA:
Is it new and old too? how may that be?

BIONDELLO:
Why, is it not news, to hear of Petruchio's coming?

BAPTISTA:
Is he come?

BIONDELLO:
Why, no, sir.

BAPTISTA:
What then?

BIONDELLO:
He is coming.

BAPTISTA:
When will he be here?

BIONDELLO:
When he stands where I am and sees you there.

TRANIO:
But say, what to thine old news?

BIONDELLO:
Why, Petruchio is coming in a new hat and an old
jerkin, a pair of old breeches thrice turned, a pair
of boots that have been candle-cases, one buckled,
another laced, an old rusty sword ta'en out of the
town-armory, with a broken hilt, and chapeless;
with two broken points: his horse hipped with an
old mothy saddle and stirrups of no kindred;
besides, possessed with the glanders and like to mose
in the chine; troubled with the lampass, infected
with the fashions, full of wingdalls, sped with
spavins, rayed with yellows, past cure of the fives,
stark spoiled with the staggers, begnawn with the
bots, swayed in the back and shoulder-shotten;
near-legged before and with, a half-chequed bit
and a head-stall of sheeps leather which, being
restrained to keep him from stumbling, hath been
often burst and now repaired with knots; one girth
six time pieced and a woman's crupper of velure,
which hath two letters for her name fairly set down
in studs, and here and there pieced with packthread.

BAPTISTA:
Who comes with him?

BIONDELLO:
O, sir, his lackey, for all the world caparisoned
like the horse; with a linen stock on one leg and a
kersey boot-hose on the other, gartered with a red
and blue list; an old hat and 'the humour of forty
fancies' pricked in't for a feather: a monster, a
very monster in apparel, and not like a Christian
footboy or a gentleman's lackey.

TRANIO:
'Tis some odd humour pricks him to this fashion;
Yet oftentimes he goes but mean-apparell'd.

BAPTISTA:
I am glad he's come, howsoe'er he comes.

BIONDELLO:
Why, sir, he comes not.

BAPTISTA:
Didst thou not say he comes?

BIONDELLO:
Who? that Petruchio came?

BAPTISTA:
Ay, that Petruchio came.

BIONDELLO:
No, sir, I say his horse comes, with him on his back.

BAPTISTA:
Why, that's all one.

BIONDELLO:
Nay, by Saint Jamy,
I hold you a penny,
A horse and a man
Is more than one,
And yet not many.

PETRUCHIO:
Come, where be these gallants? who's at home?

BAPTISTA:
You are welcome, sir.

PETRUCHIO:
And yet I come not well.

BAPTISTA:
And yet you halt not.

TRANIO:
Not so well apparell'd
As I wish you were.

PETRUCHIO:
Were it better, I should rush in thus.
But where is Kate? where is my lovely bride?
How does my father? Gentles, methinks you frown:
And wherefore gaze this goodly company,
As if they saw some wondrous monument,
Some comet or unusual prodigy?

BAPTISTA:
Why, sir, you know this is your wedding-day:
First were we sad, fearing you would not come;
Now sadder, that you come so unprovided.
Fie, doff this habit, shame to your estate,
An eye-sore to our solemn festival!

TRANIO:
And tells us, what occasion of import
Hath all so long detain'd you from your wife,
And sent you hither so unlike yourself?

PETRUCHIO:
Tedious it were to tell, and harsh to hear:
Sufficeth I am come to keep my word,
Though in some part enforced to digress;
Which, at more leisure, I will so excuse
As you shall well be satisfied withal.
But where is Kate? I stay too long from her:
The morning wears, 'tis time we were at church.

TRANIO:
See not your bride in these unreverent robes:
Go to my chamber; Put on clothes of mine.

PETRUCHIO:
Not I, believe me: thus I'll visit her.

BAPTISTA:
But thus, I trust, you will not marry her.

PETRUCHIO:
Good sooth, even thus; therefore ha' done with words:
To me she's married, not unto my clothes:
Could I repair what she will wear in me,
As I can change these poor accoutrements,
'Twere well for Kate and better for myself.
But what a fool am I to chat with you,
When I should bid good morrow to my bride,
And seal the title with a lovely kiss!

TRANIO:
He hath some meaning in his mad attire:
We will persuade him, be it possible,
To put on better ere he go to church.

BAPTISTA:
I'll after him, and see the event of this.

TRANIO:
But to her love concerneth us to add
Her father's liking: which to bring to pass,
As I before unparted to your worship,
I am to get a man,--whate'er he be,
It skills not much. we'll fit him to our turn,--
And he shall be Vincentio of Pisa;
And make assurance here in Padua
Of greater sums than I have promised.
So shall you quietly enjoy your hope,
And marry sweet Bianca with consent.

LUCENTIO:
Were it not that my fellow-school-master
Doth watch Bianca's steps so narrowly,
'Twere good, methinks, to steal our marriage;
Which once perform'd, let all the world say no,
I'll keep mine own, despite of all the world.

TRANIO:
That by degrees we mean to look into,
And watch our vantage in this business:
We'll over-reach the greybeard, Gremio,
The narrow-prying father, Minola,
The quaint musician, amorous Licio;
All for my master's sake, Lucentio.
Signior Gremio, came you from the church?

GREMIO:
As willingly as e'er I came from school.

TRANIO:
And is the bride and bridegroom coming home?

GREMIO:
A bridegroom say you? 'tis a groom indeed,
A grumbling groom, and that the girl shall find.

TRANIO:
Curster than she? why, 'tis impossible.

GREMIO:
Why he's a devil, a devil, a very fiend.

TRANIO:
Why, she's a devil, a devil, the devil's dam.

GREMIO:
Tut, she's a lamb, a dove, a fool to him!
I'll tell you, Sir Lucentio: when the priest
Should ask, if Katharina should be his wife,
'Ay, by gogs-wouns,' quoth he; and swore so loud,
That, all-amazed, the priest let fall the book;
And, as he stoop'd again to take it up,
The mad-brain'd bridegroom took him such a cuff
That down fell priest and book and book and priest:
'Now take them up,' quoth he, 'if any list.'

TRANIO:
What said the wench when he rose again?

GREMIO:
Trembled and shook; for why, he stamp'd and swore,
As if the vicar meant to cozen him.
But after many ceremonies done,
He calls for wine: 'A health!' quoth he, as if
He had been aboard, carousing to his mates
After a storm; quaff'd off the muscadel
And threw the sops all in the sexton's face;
Having no other reason
But that his beard grew thin and hungerly
And seem'd to ask him sops as he was drinking.
This done, he took the bride about the neck
And kiss'd her lips with such a clamorous smack
That at the parting all the church did echo:
And I seeing this came thence for very shame;
And after me, I know, the rout is coming.
Such a mad marriage never was before:
Hark, hark! I hear the minstrels play.

PETRUCHIO:
Gentlemen and friends, I thank you for your pains:
I know you think to dine with me to-day,
And have prepared great store of wedding cheer;
But so it is, my haste doth call me hence,
And therefore here I mean to take my leave.

BAPTISTA:
Is't possible you will away to-night?

PETRUCHIO:
I must away to-day, before night come:
Make it no wonder; if you knew my business,
You would entreat me rather go than stay.
And, honest company, I thank you all,
That have beheld me give away myself
To this most patient, sweet and virtuous wife:
Dine with my father, drink a health to me;
For I must hence; and farewell to you all.

TRANIO:
Let us entreat you stay till after dinner.

PETRUCHIO:
It may not be.

GREMIO:
Let me entreat you.

PETRUCHIO:
It cannot be.

KATHARINA:
Let me entreat you.

PETRUCHIO:
I am content.

KATHARINA:
Are you content to stay?

PETRUCHIO:
I am content you shall entreat me stay;
But yet not stay, entreat me how you can.

KATHARINA:
Now, if you love me, stay.

PETRUCHIO:
Grumio, my horse.

GRUMIO:
Ay, sir, they be ready: the oats have eaten the horses.

KATHARINA:
Nay, then,
Do what thou canst, I will not go to-day;
No, nor to-morrow, not till I please myself.
The door is open, sir; there lies your way;
You may be jogging whiles your boots are green;
For me, I'll not be gone till I please myself:
'Tis like you'll prove a jolly surly groom,
That take it on you at the first so roundly.

PETRUCHIO:
O Kate, content thee; prithee, be not angry.

KATHARINA:
I will be angry: what hast thou to do?
Father, be quiet; he shall stay my leisure.

GREMIO:
Ay, marry, sir, now it begins to work.

KATARINA:
Gentlemen, forward to the bridal dinner:
I see a woman may be made a fool,
If she had not a spirit to resist.

PETRUCHIO:
They shall go forward, Kate, at thy command.
Obey the bride, you that attend on her;
Go to the feast, revel and domineer,
Carouse full measure to her maidenhead,
Be mad and merry, or go hang yourselves:
But for my bonny Kate, she must with me.
Nay, look not big, nor stamp, nor stare, nor fret;
I will be master of what is mine own:
She is my goods, my chattels; she is my house,
My household stuff, my field, my barn,
My horse, my ox, my ass, my any thing;
And here she stands, touch her whoever dare;
I'll bring mine action on the proudest he
That stops my way in Padua. Grumio,
Draw forth thy weapon, we are beset with thieves;
Rescue thy mistress, if thou be a man.
Fear not, sweet wench, they shall not touch
thee, Kate:
I'll buckler thee against a million.

BAPTISTA:
Nay, let them go, a couple of quiet ones.

GREMIO:
Went they not quickly, I should die with laughing.

TRANIO:
Of all mad matches never was the like.

LUCENTIO:
Mistress, what's your opinion of your sister?

BIANCA:
That, being mad herself, she's madly mated.

GREMIO:
I warrant him, Petruchio is Kated.

BAPTISTA:
Neighbours and friends, though bride and
bridegroom wants
For to supply the places at the table,
You know there wants no junkets at the feast.
Lucentio, you shall supply the bridegroom's place:
And let Bianca take her sister's room.

TRANIO:
Shall sweet Bianca practise how to bride it?

BAPTISTA:
She shall, Lucentio. Come, gentlemen, let's go.

GRUMIO:
Fie, fie on all tired jades, on all mad masters, and
all foul ways! Was ever man so beaten? was ever
man so rayed? was ever man so weary? I am sent
before to make a fire, and they are coming after to
warm them. Now, were not I a little pot and soon
hot, my very lips might freeze to my teeth, my
tongue to the roof of my mouth, my heart in my
belly, ere I should come by a fire to thaw me: but
I, with blowing the fire, shall warm myself; for,
considering the weather, a taller man than I will
take cold. Holla, ho! Curtis.

CURTIS:
Who is that calls so coldly?

GRUMIO:
A piece of ice: if thou doubt it, thou mayst slide
from my shoulder to my heel with no greater a run
but my head and my neck. A fire good Curtis.

CURTIS:
Is my master and his wife coming, Grumio?

GRUMIO:
O, ay, Curtis, ay: and therefore fire, fire; cast
on no water.

CURTIS:
Is she so hot a shrew as she's reported?

GRUMIO:
She was, good Curtis, before this frost: but, thou
knowest, winter tames man, woman and beast; for it
hath tamed my old master and my new mistress and
myself, fellow Curtis.

CURTIS:
Away, you three-inch fool! I am no beast.

GRUMIO:
Am I but three inches? why, thy horn is a foot; and
so long am I at the least. But wilt thou make a
fire, or shall I complain on thee to our mistress,
whose hand, she being now at hand, thou shalt soon
feel, to thy cold comfort, for being slow in thy hot office?

CURTIS:
I prithee, good Grumio, tell me, how goes the world?

GRUMIO:
A cold world, Curtis, in every office but thine; and
therefore fire: do thy duty, and have thy duty; for
my master and mistress are almost frozen to death.

CURTIS:
There's fire ready; and therefore, good Grumio, the news.

GRUMIO:
Why, 'Jack, boy! ho! boy!' and as much news as
will thaw.

CURTIS:
Come, you are so full of cony-catching!

GRUMIO:
Why, therefore fire; for I have caught extreme cold.
Where's the cook? is supper ready, the house
trimmed, rushes strewed, cobwebs swept; the
serving-men in their new fustian, their white
stockings, and every officer his wedding-garment on?
Be the jacks fair within, the jills fair without,
the carpets laid, and every thing in order?

CURTIS:
All ready; and therefore, I pray thee, news.

GRUMIO:
First, know, my horse is tired; my master and
mistress fallen out.

CURTIS:
How?

GRUMIO:
Out of their saddles into the dirt; and thereby
hangs a tale.

CURTIS:
Let's ha't, good Grumio.

GRUMIO:
Lend thine ear.

CURTIS:
Here.

GRUMIO:
There.

CURTIS:
This is to feel a tale, not to hear a tale.

GRUMIO:
And therefore 'tis called a sensible tale: and this
cuff was but to knock at your ear, and beseech
listening. Now I begin: Imprimis, we came down a
foul hill, my master riding behind my mistress,--

CURTIS:
Both of one horse?

GRUMIO:
What's that to thee?

CURTIS:
Why, a horse.

GRUMIO:
Tell thou the tale: but hadst thou not crossed me,
thou shouldst have heard how her horse fell and she
under her horse; thou shouldst have heard in how
miry a place, how she was bemoiled, how he left her
with the horse upon her, how he beat me because
her horse stumbled, how she waded through the dirt
to pluck him off me, how he swore, how she prayed,
that never prayed before, how I cried, how the
horses ran away, how her bridle was burst, how I
lost my crupper, with many things of worthy memory,
which now shall die in oblivion and thou return
unexperienced to thy grave.

CURTIS:
By this reckoning he is more shrew than she.

GRUMIO:
Ay; and that thou and the proudest of you all shall
find when he comes home. But what talk I of this?
Call forth Nathaniel, Joseph, Nicholas, Philip,
Walter, Sugarsop and the rest: let their heads be
sleekly combed their blue coats brushed and their
garters of an indifferent knit: let them curtsy
with their left legs and not presume to touch a hair
of my master's horse-tail till they kiss their
hands. Are they all ready?

CURTIS:
They are.

GRUMIO:
Call them forth.

CURTIS:
Do you hear, ho? you must meet my master to
countenance my mistress.

GRUMIO:
Why, she hath a face of her own.

CURTIS:
Who knows not that?

GRUMIO:
Thou, it seems, that calls for company to
countenance her.

CURTIS:
I call them forth to credit her.

GRUMIO:
Why, she comes to borrow nothing of them.

NATHANIEL:
Welcome home, Grumio!

PHILIP:
How now, Grumio!

JOSEPH:
What, Grumio!

NICHOLAS:
Fellow Grumio!

NATHANIEL:
How now, old lad?

GRUMIO:
Welcome, you;--how now, you;-- what, you;--fellow,
you;--and thus much for greeting. Now, my spruce
companions, is all ready, and all things neat?

NATHANIEL:
All things is ready. How near is our master?

GRUMIO:
E'en at hand, alighted by this; and therefore be
not--Cock's passion, silence! I hear my master.

PETRUCHIO:
Where be these knaves? What, no man at door
To hold my stirrup nor to take my horse!
Where is Nathaniel, Gregory, Philip?

ALL SERVING-MEN:
Here, here, sir; here, sir.

PETRUCHIO:
Here, sir! here, sir! here, sir! here, sir!
You logger-headed and unpolish'd grooms!
What, no attendance? no regard? no duty?
Where is the foolish knave I sent before?

GRUMIO:
Here, sir; as foolish as I was before.

PETRUCHIO:
You peasant swain! you whoreson malt-horse drudge!
Did I not bid thee meet me in the park,
And bring along these rascal knaves with thee?

GRUMIO:
Nathaniel's coat, sir, was not fully made,
And Gabriel's pumps were all unpink'd i' the heel;
There was no link to colour Peter's hat,
And Walter's dagger was not come from sheathing:
There were none fine but Adam, Ralph, and Gregory;
The rest were ragged, old, and beggarly;
Yet, as they are, here are they come to meet you.

PETRUCHIO:
Go, rascals, go, and fetch my supper in.
Where is the life that late I led--
Where are those--Sit down, Kate, and welcome.--
Sound, sound, sound, sound!
Why, when, I say? Nay, good sweet Kate, be merry.
Off with my boots, you rogues! you villains, when?
It was the friar of orders grey,
As he forth walked on his way:--
Out, you rogue! you pluck my foot awry:
Take that, and mend the plucking off the other.
Be merry, Kate. Some water, here; what, ho!
Where's my spaniel Troilus? Sirrah, get you hence,
And bid my cousin Ferdinand come hither:
One, Kate, that you must kiss, and be acquainted with.
Where are my slippers? Shall I have some water?
Come, Kate, and wash, and welcome heartily.
You whoreson villain! will you let it fall?

KATHARINA:
Patience, I pray you; 'twas a fault unwilling.

PETRUCHIO:
A whoreson beetle-headed, flap-ear'd knave!
Come, Kate, sit down; I know you have a stomach.
Will you give thanks, sweet Kate; or else shall I?
What's this? mutton?

First Servant:
Ay.

PETRUCHIO:
Who brought it?

PETER:
I.

PETRUCHIO:
'Tis burnt; and so is all the meat.
What dogs are these! Where is the rascal cook?
How durst you, villains, bring it from the dresser,
And serve it thus to me that love it not?
Theretake it to you, trenchers, cups, and all;
You heedless joltheads and unmanner'd slaves!
What, do you grumble? I'll be with you straight.

KATHARINA:
I pray you, husband, be not so disquiet:
The meat was well, if you were so contented.

PETRUCHIO:
I tell thee, Kate, 'twas burnt and dried away;
And I expressly am forbid to touch it,
For it engenders choler, planteth anger;
And better 'twere that both of us did fast,
Since, of ourselves, ourselves are choleric,
Than feed it with such over-roasted flesh.
Be patient; to-morrow 't shall be mended,
And, for this night, we'll fast for company:
Come, I will bring thee to thy bridal chamber.

NATHANIEL:
Peter, didst ever see the like?

PETER:
He kills her in her own humour.

GRUMIO:
Where is he?

CURTIS:
In her chamber, making a sermon of continency to her;
And rails, and swears, and rates, that she, poor soul,
Knows not which way to stand, to look, to speak,
And sits as one new-risen from a dream.
Away, away! for he is coming hither.

PETRUCHIO:
Thus have I politicly begun my reign,
And 'tis my hope to end successfully.
My falcon now is sharp and passing empty;
And till she stoop she must not be full-gorged,
For then she never looks upon her lure.
Another way I have to man my haggard,
To make her come and know her keeper's call,
That is, to watch her, as we watch these kites
That bate and beat and will not be obedient.
She eat no meat to-day, nor none shall eat;
Last night she slept not, nor to-night she shall not;
As with the meat, some undeserved fault
I'll find about the making of the bed;
And here I'll fling the pillow, there the bolster,
This way the coverlet, another way the sheets:
Ay, and amid this hurly I intend
That all is done in reverend care of her;
And in conclusion she shall watch all night:
And if she chance to nod I'll rail and brawl
And with the clamour keep her still awake.
This is a way to kill a wife with kindness;
And thus I'll curb her mad and headstrong humour.
He that knows better how to tame a shrew,
Now let him speak: 'tis charity to show.

TRANIO:
Is't possible, friend Licio, that Mistress Bianca
Doth fancy any other but Lucentio?
I tell you, sir, she bears me fair in hand.

HORTENSIO:
Sir, to satisfy you in what I have said,
Stand by and mark the manner of his teaching.

LUCENTIO:
Now, mistress, profit you in what you read?

BIANCA:
What, master, read you? first resolve me that.

LUCENTIO:
I read that I profess, the Art to Love.

BIANCA:
And may you prove, sir, master of your art!

LUCENTIO:
While you, sweet dear, prove mistress of my heart!

HORTENSIO:
Quick proceeders, marry! Now, tell me, I pray,
You that durst swear at your mistress Bianca
Loved none in the world so well as Lucentio.

TRANIO:
O despiteful love! unconstant womankind!
I tell thee, Licio, this is wonderful.

HORTENSIO:
Mistake no more: I am not Licio,
Nor a musician, as I seem to be;
But one that scorn to live in this disguise,
For such a one as leaves a gentleman,
And makes a god of such a cullion:
Know, sir, that I am call'd Hortensio.

TRANIO:
Signior Hortensio, I have often heard
Of your entire affection to Bianca;
And since mine eyes are witness of her lightness,
I will with you, if you be so contented,
Forswear Bianca and her love for ever.

HORTENSIO:
See, how they kiss and court! Signior Lucentio,
Here is my hand, and here I firmly vow
Never to woo her no more, but do forswear her,
As one unworthy all the former favours
That I have fondly flatter'd her withal.

TRANIO:
And here I take the unfeigned oath,
Never to marry with her though she would entreat:
Fie on her! see, how beastly she doth court him!

HORTENSIO:
Would all the world but he had quite forsworn!
For me, that I may surely keep mine oath,
I will be married to a wealthy widow,
Ere three days pass, which hath as long loved me
As I have loved this proud disdainful haggard.
And so farewell, Signior Lucentio.
Kindness in women, not their beauteous looks,
Shall win my love: and so I take my leave,
In resolution as I swore before.

TRANIO:
Mistress Bianca, bless you with such grace
As 'longeth to a lover's blessed case!
Nay, I have ta'en you napping, gentle love,
And have forsworn you with Hortensio.

BIANCA:
Tranio, you jest: but have you both forsworn me?

TRANIO:
Mistress, we have.

LUCENTIO:
Then we are rid of Licio.

TRANIO:
I' faith, he'll have a lusty widow now,
That shall be wood and wedded in a day.

BIANCA:
God give him joy!

TRANIO:
Ay, and he'll tame her.

BIANCA:
He says so, Tranio.

TRANIO:
Faith, he is gone unto the taming-school.

BIANCA:
The taming-school! what, is there such a place?

TRANIO:
Ay, mistress, and Petruchio is the master;
That teacheth tricks eleven and twenty long,
To tame a shrew and charm her chattering tongue.

BIONDELLO:
O master, master, I have watch'd so long
That I am dog-weary: but at last I spied
An ancient angel coming down the hill,
Will serve the turn.

TRANIO:
What is he, Biondello?

BIONDELLO:
Master, a mercatante, or a pedant,
I know not what; but format in apparel,
In gait and countenance surely like a father.

LUCENTIO:
And what of him, Tranio?

TRANIO:
If he be credulous and trust my tale,
I'll make him glad to seem Vincentio,
And give assurance to Baptista Minola,
As if he were the right Vincentio
Take in your love, and then let me alone.

Pedant:
God save you, sir!

TRANIO:
And you, sir! you are welcome.
Travel you far on, or are you at the farthest?

Pedant:
Sir, at the farthest for a week or two:
But then up farther, and as for as Rome;
And so to Tripoli, if God lend me life.

TRANIO:
What countryman, I pray?

Pedant:
Of Mantua.

TRANIO:
Of Mantua, sir? marry, God forbid!
And come to Padua, careless of your life?

Pedant:
My life, sir! how, I pray? for that goes hard.

TRANIO:
'Tis death for any one in Mantua
To come to Padua. Know you not the cause?
Your ships are stay'd at Venice, and the duke,
For private quarrel 'twixt your duke and him,
Hath publish'd and proclaim'd it openly:
'Tis, marvel, but that you are but newly come,
You might have heard it else proclaim'd about.

Pedant:
Alas! sir, it is worse for me than so;
For I have bills for money by exchange
From Florence and must here deliver them.

TRANIO:
Well, sir, to do you courtesy,
This will I do, and this I will advise you:
First, tell me, have you ever been at Pisa?

Pedant:
Ay, sir, in Pisa have I often been,
Pisa renowned for grave citizens.

TRANIO:
Among them know you one Vincentio?

Pedant:
I know him not, but I have heard of him;
A merchant of incomparable wealth.

TRANIO:
He is my father, sir; and, sooth to say,
In countenance somewhat doth resemble you.

BIONDELLO:

TRANIO:
To save your life in this extremity,
This favour will I do you for his sake;
And think it not the worst of an your fortunes
That you are like to Sir Vincentio.
His name and credit shall you undertake,
And in my house you shall be friendly lodged:
Look that you take upon you as you should;
You understand me, sir: so shall you stay
Till you have done your business in the city:
If this be courtesy, sir, accept of it.

Pedant:
O sir, I do; and will repute you ever
The patron of my life and liberty.

TRANIO:
Then go with me to make the matter good.
This, by the way, I let you understand;
my father is here look'd for every day,
To pass assurance of a dower in marriage
'Twixt me and one Baptista's daughter here:
In all these circumstances I'll instruct you:
Go with me to clothe you as becomes you.

GRUMIO:
No, no, forsooth; I dare not for my life.

KATHARINA:
The more my wrong, the more his spite appears:
What, did he marry me to famish me?
Beggars, that come unto my father's door,
Upon entreaty have a present aims;
If not, elsewhere they meet with charity:
But I, who never knew how to entreat,
Nor never needed that I should entreat,
Am starved for meat, giddy for lack of sleep,
With oath kept waking and with brawling fed:
And that which spites me more than all these wants,
He does it under name of perfect love;
As who should say, if I should sleep or eat,
'Twere deadly sickness or else present death.
I prithee go and get me some repast;
I care not what, so it be wholesome food.

GRUMIO:
What say you to a neat's foot?

KATHARINA:
'Tis passing good: I prithee let me have it.

GRUMIO:
I fear it is too choleric a meat.
How say you to a fat tripe finely broil'd?

KATHARINA:
I like it well: good Grumio, fetch it me.

GRUMIO:
I cannot tell; I fear 'tis choleric.
What say you to a piece of beef and mustard?

KATHARINA:
A dish that I do love to feed upon.

GRUMIO:
Ay, but the mustard is too hot a little.

KATHARINA:
Why then, the beef, and let the mustard rest.

GRUMIO:
Nay then, I will not: you shall have the mustard,
Or else you get no beef of Grumio.

KATHARINA:
Then both, or one, or any thing thou wilt.

GRUMIO:
Why then, the mustard without the beef.

KATHARINA:
Go, get thee gone, thou false deluding slave,
That feed'st me with the very name of meat:
Sorrow on thee and all the pack of you,
That triumph thus upon my misery!
Go, get thee gone, I say.

PETRUCHIO:
How fares my Kate? What, sweeting, all amort?

HORTENSIO:
Mistress, what cheer?

KATHARINA:
Faith, as cold as can be.

PETRUCHIO:
Pluck up thy spirits; look cheerfully upon me.
Here love; thou see'st how diligent I am
To dress thy meat myself and bring it thee:
I am sure, sweet Kate, this kindness merits thanks.
What, not a word? Nay, then thou lovest it not;
And all my pains is sorted to no proof.
Here, take away this dish.

KATHARINA:
I pray you, let it stand.

PETRUCHIO:
The poorest service is repaid with thanks;
And so shall mine, before you touch the meat.

KATHARINA:
I thank you, sir.

HORTENSIO:
Signior Petruchio, fie! you are to blame.
Come, mistress Kate, I'll bear you company.

PETRUCHIO:

Haberdasher:
Here is the cap your worship did bespeak.

PETRUCHIO:
Why, this was moulded on a porringer;
A velvet dish: fie, fie! 'tis lewd and filthy:
Why, 'tis a cockle or a walnut-shell,
A knack, a toy, a trick, a baby's cap:
Away with it! come, let me have a bigger.

KATHARINA:
I'll have no bigger: this doth fit the time,
And gentlewomen wear such caps as these

PETRUCHIO:
When you are gentle, you shall have one too,
And not till then.

HORTENSIO:

KATHARINA:
Why, sir, I trust I may have leave to speak;
And speak I will; I am no child, no babe:
Your betters have endured me say my mind,
And if you cannot, best you stop your ears.
My tongue will tell the anger of my heart,
Or else my heart concealing it will break,
And rather than it shall, I will be free
Even to the uttermost, as I please, in words.

PETRUCHIO:
Why, thou say'st true; it is a paltry cap,
A custard-coffin, a bauble, a silken pie:
I love thee well, in that thou likest it not.

KATHARINA:
Love me or love me not, I like the cap;
And it I will have, or I will have none.

PETRUCHIO:
Thy gown? why, ay: come, tailor, let us see't.
O mercy, God! what masquing stuff is here?
What's this? a sleeve? 'tis like a demi-cannon:
What, up and down, carved like an apple-tart?
Here's snip and nip and cut and slish and slash,
Like to a censer in a barber's shop:
Why, what, i' devil's name, tailor, call'st thou this?

HORTENSIO:

Tailor:
You bid me make it orderly and well,
According to the fashion and the time.

PETRUCHIO:
Marry, and did; but if you be remember'd,
I did not bid you mar it to the time.
Go, hop me over every kennel home,
For you shall hop without my custom, sir:
I'll none of it: hence! make your best of it.

KATHARINA:
I never saw a better-fashion'd gown,
More quaint, more pleasing, nor more commendable:
Belike you mean to make a puppet of me.

PETRUCHIO:
Why, true; he means to make a puppet of thee.

Tailor:
She says your worship means to make
a puppet of her.

PETRUCHIO:
O monstrous arrogance! Thou liest, thou thread,
thou thimble,
Thou yard, three-quarters, half-yard, quarter, nail!
Thou flea, thou nit, thou winter-cricket thou!
Braved in mine own house with a skein of thread?
Away, thou rag, thou quantity, thou remnant;
Or I shall so be-mete thee with thy yard
As thou shalt think on prating whilst thou livest!
I tell thee, I, that thou hast marr'd her gown.

Tailor:
Your worship is deceived; the gown is made
Just as my master had direction:
Grumio gave order how it should be done.

GRUMIO:
I gave him no order; I gave him the stuff.

Tailor:
But how did you desire it should be made?

GRUMIO:
Marry, sir, with needle and thread.

Tailor:
But did you not request to have it cut?

GRUMIO:
Thou hast faced many things.

Tailor:
I have.

GRUMIO:
Face not me: thou hast braved many men; brave not
me; I will neither be faced nor braved. I say unto
thee, I bid thy master cut out the gown; but I did
not bid him cut it to pieces: ergo, thou liest.

Tailor:
Why, here is the note of the fashion to testify

PETRUCHIO:
Read it.

GRUMIO:
The note lies in's throat, if he say I said so.

Tailor:

GRUMIO:
Master, if ever I said loose-bodied gown, sew me in
the skirts of it, and beat me to death with a bottom
of brown thread: I said a gown.

PETRUCHIO:
Proceed.

Tailor:

GRUMIO:
I confess the cape.

Tailor:

GRUMIO:
I confess two sleeves.

Tailor:

PETRUCHIO:
Ay, there's the villany.

GRUMIO:
Error i' the bill, sir; error i' the bill.
I commanded the sleeves should be cut out and
sewed up again; and that I'll prove upon thee,
though thy little finger be armed in a thimble.

Tailor:
This is true that I say: an I had thee
in place where, thou shouldst know it.

GRUMIO:
I am for thee straight: take thou the
bill, give me thy mete-yard, and spare not me.

HORTENSIO:
God-a-mercy, Grumio! then he shall have no odds.

PETRUCHIO:
Well, sir, in brief, the gown is not for me.

GRUMIO:
You are i' the right, sir: 'tis for my mistress.

PETRUCHIO:
Go, take it up unto thy master's use.

GRUMIO:
Villain, not for thy life: take up my mistress'
gown for thy master's use!

PETRUCHIO:
Why, sir, what's your conceit in that?

GRUMIO:
O, sir, the conceit is deeper than you think for:
Take up my mistress' gown to his master's use!
O, fie, fie, fie!

PETRUCHIO:

HORTENSIO:
Tailor, I'll pay thee for thy gown tomorrow:
Take no unkindness of his hasty words:
Away! I say; commend me to thy master.

PETRUCHIO:
Well, come, my Kate; we will unto your father's
Even in these honest mean habiliments:
Our purses shall be proud, our garments poor;
For 'tis the mind that makes the body rich;
And as the sun breaks through the darkest clouds,
So honour peereth in the meanest habit.
What is the jay more precious than the lark,
Because his fathers are more beautiful?
Or is the adder better than the eel,
Because his painted skin contents the eye?
O, no, good Kate; neither art thou the worse
For this poor furniture and mean array.
if thou account'st it shame. lay it on me;
And therefore frolic: we will hence forthwith,
To feast and sport us at thy father's house.
Go, call my men, and let us straight to him;
And bring our horses unto Long-lane end;
There will we mount, and thither walk on foot
Let's see; I think 'tis now some seven o'clock,
And well we may come there by dinner-time.

KATHARINA:
I dare assure you, sir, 'tis almost two;
And 'twill be supper-time ere you come there.

PETRUCHIO:
It shall be seven ere I go to horse:
Look, what I speak, or do, or think to do,
You are still crossing it. Sirs, let't alone:
I will not go to-day; and ere I do,
It shall be what o'clock I say it is.

HORTENSIO:

TRANIO:
Sir, this is the house: please it you that I call?

Pedant:
Ay, what else? and but I be deceived
Signior Baptista may remember me,
Near twenty years ago, in Genoa,
Where we were lodgers at the Pegasus.

TRANIO:
'Tis well; and hold your own, in any case,
With such austerity as 'longeth to a father.

Pedant:
I warrant you.
But, sir, here comes your boy;
'Twere good he were school'd.

TRANIO:
Fear you not him. Sirrah Biondello,
Now do your duty throughly, I advise you:
Imagine 'twere the right Vincentio.

BIONDELLO:
Tut, fear not me.

TRANIO:
But hast thou done thy errand to Baptista?

BIONDELLO:
I told him that your father was at Venice,
And that you look'd for him this day in Padua.

TRANIO:
Thou'rt a tall fellow: hold thee that to drink.
Here comes Baptista: set your countenance, sir.
Signior Baptista, you are happily met.
Sir, this is the gentleman I told you of:
I pray you stand good father to me now,
Give me Bianca for my patrimony.

Pedant:
Soft son!
Sir, by your leave: having come to Padua
To gather in some debts, my son Lucentio
Made me acquainted with a weighty cause
Of love between your daughter and himself:
And, for the good report I hear of you
And for the love he beareth to your daughter
And she to him, to stay him not too long,
I am content, in a good father's care,
To have him match'd; and if you please to like
No worse than I, upon some agreement
Me shall you find ready and willing
With one consent to have her so bestow'd;
For curious I cannot be with you,
Signior Baptista, of whom I hear so well.

BAPTISTA:
Sir, pardon me in what I have to say:
Your plainness and your shortness please me well.
Right true it is, your son Lucentio here
Doth love my daughter and she loveth him,
Or both dissemble deeply their affections:
And therefore, if you say no more than this,
That like a father you will deal with him
And pass my daughter a sufficient dower,
The match is made, and all is done:
Your son shall have my daughter with consent.

TRANIO:
I thank you, sir. Where then do you know best
We be affied and such assurance ta'en
As shall with either part's agreement stand?

BAPTISTA:
Not in my house, Lucentio; for, you know,
Pitchers have ears, and I have many servants:
Besides, old Gremio is hearkening still;
And happily we might be interrupted.

TRANIO:
Then at my lodging, an it like you:
There doth my father lie; and there, this night,
We'll pass the business privately and well.
Send for your daughter by your servant here:
My boy shall fetch the scrivener presently.
The worst is this, that, at so slender warning,
You are like to have a thin and slender pittance.

BAPTISTA:
It likes me well. Biondello, hie you home,
And bid Bianca make her ready straight;
And, if you will, tell what hath happened,
Lucentio's father is arrived in Padua,
And how she's like to be Lucentio's wife.

BIONDELLO:
I pray the gods she may with all my heart!

TRANIO:
Dally not with the gods, but get thee gone.
Signior Baptista, shall I lead the way?
Welcome! one mess is like to be your cheer:
Come, sir; we will better it in Pisa.

BAPTISTA:
I follow you.

BIONDELLO:
Cambio!

LUCENTIO:
What sayest thou, Biondello?

BIONDELLO:
You saw my master wink and laugh upon you?

LUCENTIO:
Biondello, what of that?

BIONDELLO:
Faith, nothing; but has left me here behind, to
expound the meaning or moral of his signs and tokens.

LUCENTIO:
I pray thee, moralize them.

BIONDELLO:
Then thus. Baptista is safe, talking with the
deceiving father of a deceitful son.

LUCENTIO:
And what of him?

BIONDELLO:
His daughter is to be brought by you to the supper.

LUCENTIO:
And then?

BIONDELLO:
The old priest of Saint Luke's church is at your
command at all hours.

LUCENTIO:
And what of all this?

BIONDELLO:
I cannot tell; expect they are busied about a
counterfeit assurance: take you assurance of her,
'cum privilegio ad imprimendum solum:' to the
church; take the priest, clerk, and some sufficient
honest witnesses: If this be not that you look for,
I have no more to say, But bid Bianca farewell for
ever and a day.

LUCENTIO:
Hearest thou, Biondello?

BIONDELLO:
I cannot tarry: I knew a wench married in an
afternoon as she went to the garden for parsley to
stuff a rabbit; and so may you, sir: and so, adieu,
sir. My master hath appointed me to go to Saint
Luke's, to bid the priest be ready to come against
you come with your appendix.

LUCENTIO:
I may, and will, if she be so contented:
She will be pleased; then wherefore should I doubt?
Hap what hap may, I'll roundly go about her:
It shall go hard if Cambio go without her.

PETRUCHIO:
Come on, i' God's name; once more toward our father's.
Good Lord, how bright and goodly shines the moon!

KATHARINA:
The moon! the sun: it is not moonlight now.

PETRUCHIO:
I say it is the moon that shines so bright.

KATHARINA:
I know it is the sun that shines so bright.

PETRUCHIO:
Now, by my mother's son, and that's myself,
It shall be moon, or star, or what I list,
Or ere I journey to your father's house.
Go on, and fetch our horses back again.
Evermore cross'd and cross'd; nothing but cross'd!

HORTENSIO:
Say as he says, or we shall never go.

KATHARINA:
Forward, I pray, since we have come so far,
And be it moon, or sun, or what you please:
An if you please to call it a rush-candle,
Henceforth I vow it shall be so for me.

PETRUCHIO:
I say it is the moon.

KATHARINA:
I know it is the moon.

PETRUCHIO:
Nay, then you lie: it is the blessed sun.

KATHARINA:
Then, God be bless'd, it is the blessed sun:
But sun it is not, when you say it is not;
And the moon changes even as your mind.
What you will have it named, even that it is;
And so it shall be so for Katharina.

HORTENSIO:
Petruchio, go thy ways; the field is won.

PETRUCHIO:
Well, forward, forward! thus the bowl should run,
And not unluckily against the bias.
But, soft! company is coming here.
Good morrow, gentle mistress: where away?
Tell me, sweet Kate, and tell me truly too,
Hast thou beheld a fresher gentlewoman?
Such war of white and red within her cheeks!
What stars do spangle heaven with such beauty,
As those two eyes become that heavenly face?
Fair lovely maid, once more good day to thee.
Sweet Kate, embrace her for her beauty's sake.

HORTENSIO:
A' will make the man mad, to make a woman of him.

KATHARINA:
Young budding virgin, fair and fresh and sweet,
Whither away, or where is thy abode?
Happy the parents of so fair a child;
Happier the man, whom favourable stars
Allot thee for his lovely bed-fellow!

PETRUCHIO:
Why, how now, Kate! I hope thou art not mad:
This is a man, old, wrinkled, faded, wither'd,
And not a maiden, as thou say'st he is.

KATHARINA:
Pardon, old father, my mistaking eyes,
That have been so bedazzled with the sun
That everything I look on seemeth green:
Now I perceive thou art a reverend father;
Pardon, I pray thee, for my mad mistaking.

PETRUCHIO:
Do, good old grandsire; and withal make known
Which way thou travellest: if along with us,
We shall be joyful of thy company.

VINCENTIO:
Fair sir, and you my merry mistress,
That with your strange encounter much amazed me,
My name is call'd Vincentio; my dwelling Pisa;
And bound I am to Padua; there to visit
A son of mine, which long I have not seen.

PETRUCHIO:
What is his name?

VINCENTIO:
Lucentio, gentle sir.

PETRUCHIO:
Happily we met; the happier for thy son.
And now by law, as well as reverend age,
I may entitle thee my loving father:
The sister to my wife, this gentlewoman,
Thy son by this hath married. Wonder not,
Nor be grieved: she is of good esteem,
Her dowery wealthy, and of worthy birth;
Beside, so qualified as may beseem
The spouse of any noble gentleman.
Let me embrace with old Vincentio,
And wander we to see thy honest son,
Who will of thy arrival be full joyous.

VINCENTIO:
But is it true? or else is it your pleasure,
Like pleasant travellers, to break a jest
Upon the company you overtake?

HORTENSIO:
I do assure thee, father, so it is.

PETRUCHIO:
Come, go along, and see the truth hereof;
For our first merriment hath made thee jealous.

HORTENSIO:
Well, Petruchio, this has put me in heart.
Have to my widow! and if she be froward,
Then hast thou taught Hortensio to be untoward.

BIONDELLO:
Softly and swiftly, sir; for the priest is ready.

LUCENTIO:
I fly, Biondello: but they may chance to need thee
at home; therefore leave us.

BIONDELLO:
Nay, faith, I'll see the church o' your back; and
then come back to my master's as soon as I can.

GREMIO:
I marvel Cambio comes not all this while.

PETRUCHIO:
Sir, here's the door, this is Lucentio's house:
My father's bears more toward the market-place;
Thither must I, and here I leave you, sir.

VINCENTIO:
You shall not choose but drink before you go:
I think I shall command your welcome here,
And, by all likelihood, some cheer is toward.

GREMIO:
They're busy within; you were best knock louder.

Pedant:
What's he that knocks as he would beat down the gate?

VINCENTIO:
Is Signior Lucentio within, sir?

Pedant:
He's within, sir, but not to be spoken withal.

VINCENTIO:
What if a man bring him a hundred pound or two, to
make merry withal?

Pedant:
Keep your hundred pounds to yourself: he shall
need none, so long as I live.

PETRUCHIO:
Nay, I told you your son was well beloved in Padua.
Do you hear, sir? To leave frivolous circumstances,
I pray you, tell Signior Lucentio that his father is
come from Pisa, and is here at the door to speak with him.

Pedant:
Thou liest: his father is come from Padua and here
looking out at the window.

VINCENTIO:
Art thou his father?

Pedant:
Ay, sir; so his mother says, if I may believe her.

PETRUCHIO:

Pedant:
Lay hands on the villain: I believe a' means to
cozen somebody in this city under my countenance.

BIONDELLO:
I have seen them in the church together: God send
'em good shipping! But who is here? mine old
master Vincentio! now we are undone and brought to nothing.

VINCENTIO:

BIONDELLO:
Hope I may choose, sir.

VINCENTIO:
Come hither, you rogue. What, have you forgot me?

BIONDELLO:
Forgot you! no, sir: I could not forget you, for I
never saw you before in all my life.

VINCENTIO:
What, you notorious villain, didst thou never see
thy master's father, Vincentio?

BIONDELLO:
What, my old worshipful old master? yes, marry, sir:
see where he looks out of the window.

VINCENTIO:
Is't so, indeed.

BIONDELLO:
Help, help, help! here's a madman will murder me.

Pedant:
Help, son! help, Signior Baptista!


--- End of file: shakespear_19.txt ---


PETRUCHIO:
Prithee, Kate, let's stand aside and see the end of
this controversy.

TRANIO:
Sir, what are you that offer to beat my servant?

VINCENTIO:
What am I, sir! nay, what are you, sir? O immortal
gods! O fine villain! A silken doublet! a velvet
hose! a scarlet cloak! and a copatain hat! O, I
am undone! I am undone! while I play the good
husband at home, my son and my servant spend all at
the university.

TRANIO:
How now! what's the matter?

BAPTISTA:
What, is the man lunatic?

TRANIO:
Sir, you seem a sober ancient gentleman by your
habit, but your words show you a madman. Why, sir,
what 'cerns it you if I wear pearl and gold? I
thank my good father, I am able to maintain it.

VINCENTIO:
Thy father! O villain! he is a sailmaker in Bergamo.

BAPTISTA:
You mistake, sir, you mistake, sir. Pray, what do
you think is his name?

VINCENTIO:
His name! as if I knew not his name: I have brought
him up ever since he was three years old, and his
name is Tranio.

Pedant:
Away, away, mad ass! his name is Lucentio and he is
mine only son, and heir to the lands of me, Signior Vincentio.

VINCENTIO:
Lucentio! O, he hath murdered his master! Lay hold
on him, I charge you, in the duke's name. O, my
son, my son! Tell me, thou villain, where is my son Lucentio?

TRANIO:
Call forth an officer.
Carry this mad knave to the gaol. Father Baptista,
I charge you see that he be forthcoming.

VINCENTIO:
Carry me to the gaol!

GREMIO:
Stay, officer: he shall not go to prison.

BAPTISTA:
Talk not, Signior Gremio: I say he shall go to prison.

GREMIO:
Take heed, Signior Baptista, lest you be
cony-catched in this business: I dare swear this
is the right Vincentio.

Pedant:
Swear, if thou darest.

GREMIO:
Nay, I dare not swear it.

TRANIO:
Then thou wert best say that I am not Lucentio.

GREMIO:
Yes, I know thee to be Signior Lucentio.

BAPTISTA:
Away with the dotard! to the gaol with him!

VINCENTIO:
Thus strangers may be hailed and abused: O
monstrous villain!

BIONDELLO:
O! we are spoiled and--yonder he is: deny him,
forswear him, or else we are all undone.

LUCENTIO:

VINCENTIO:
Lives my sweet son?

BIANCA:
Pardon, dear father.

BAPTISTA:
How hast thou offended?
Where is Lucentio?

LUCENTIO:
Here's Lucentio,
Right son to the right Vincentio;
That have by marriage made thy daughter mine,
While counterfeit supposes bleared thine eyne.

GREMIO:
Here's packing, with a witness to deceive us all!

VINCENTIO:
Where is that damned villain Tranio,
That faced and braved me in this matter so?

BAPTISTA:
Why, tell me, is not this my Cambio?

BIANCA:
Cambio is changed into Lucentio.

LUCENTIO:
Love wrought these miracles. Bianca's love
Made me exchange my state with Tranio,
While he did bear my countenance in the town;
And happily I have arrived at the last
Unto the wished haven of my bliss.
What Tranio did, myself enforced him to;
Then pardon him, sweet father, for my sake.

VINCENTIO:
I'll slit the villain's nose, that would have sent
me to the gaol.

BAPTISTA:
But do you hear, sir? have you married my daughter
without asking my good will?

VINCENTIO:
Fear not, Baptista; we will content you, go to: but
I will in, to be revenged for this villany.

BAPTISTA:
And I, to sound the depth of this knavery.

LUCENTIO:
Look not pale, Bianca; thy father will not frown.

GREMIO:
My cake is dough; but I'll in among the rest,
Out of hope of all, but my share of the feast.

KATHARINA:
Husband, let's follow, to see the end of this ado.

PETRUCHIO:
First kiss me, Kate, and we will.

KATHARINA:
What, in the midst of the street?

PETRUCHIO:
What, art thou ashamed of me?

KATHARINA:
No, sir, God forbid; but ashamed to kiss.

PETRUCHIO:
Why, then let's home again. Come, sirrah, let's away.

KATHARINA:
Nay, I will give thee a kiss: now pray thee, love, stay.

PETRUCHIO:
Is not this well? Come, my sweet Kate:
Better once than never, for never too late.

LUCENTIO:
At last, though long, our jarring notes agree:
And time it is, when raging war is done,
To smile at scapes and perils overblown.
My fair Bianca, bid my father welcome,
While I with self-same kindness welcome thine.
Brother Petruchio, sister Katharina,
And thou, Hortensio, with thy loving widow,
Feast with the best, and welcome to my house:
My banquet is to close our stomachs up,
After our great good cheer. Pray you, sit down;
For now we sit to chat as well as eat.

PETRUCHIO:
Nothing but sit and sit, and eat and eat!

BAPTISTA:
Padua affords this kindness, son Petruchio.

PETRUCHIO:
Padua affords nothing but what is kind.

HORTENSIO:
For both our sakes, I would that word were true.

PETRUCHIO:
Now, for my life, Hortensio fears his widow.

Widow:
Then never trust me, if I be afeard.

PETRUCHIO:
You are very sensible, and yet you miss my sense:
I mean, Hortensio is afeard of you.

Widow:
He that is giddy thinks the world turns round.

PETRUCHIO:
Roundly replied.

KATHARINA:
Mistress, how mean you that?

Widow:
Thus I conceive by him.

PETRUCHIO:
Conceives by me! How likes Hortensio that?

HORTENSIO:
My widow says, thus she conceives her tale.

PETRUCHIO:
Very well mended. Kiss him for that, good widow.

KATHARINA:
'He that is giddy thinks the world turns round:'
I pray you, tell me what you meant by that.

Widow:
Your husband, being troubled with a shrew,
Measures my husband's sorrow by his woe:
And now you know my meaning,

KATHARINA:
A very mean meaning.

Widow:
Right, I mean you.

KATHARINA:
And I am mean indeed, respecting you.

PETRUCHIO:
To her, Kate!

HORTENSIO:
To her, widow!

PETRUCHIO:
A hundred marks, my Kate does put her down.

HORTENSIO:
That's my office.

PETRUCHIO:
Spoke like an officer; ha' to thee, lad!

BAPTISTA:
How likes Gremio these quick-witted folks?

GREMIO:
Believe me, sir, they butt together well.

BIANCA:
Head, and butt! an hasty-witted body
Would say your head and butt were head and horn.

VINCENTIO:
Ay, mistress bride, hath that awaken'd you?

BIANCA:
Ay, but not frighted me; therefore I'll sleep again.

PETRUCHIO:
Nay, that you shall not: since you have begun,
Have at you for a bitter jest or two!

BIANCA:
Am I your bird? I mean to shift my bush;
And then pursue me as you draw your bow.
You are welcome all.

PETRUCHIO:
She hath prevented me. Here, Signior Tranio.
This bird you aim'd at, though you hit her not;
Therefore a health to all that shot and miss'd.

TRANIO:
O, sir, Lucentio slipp'd me like his greyhound,
Which runs himself and catches for his master.

PETRUCHIO:
A good swift simile, but something currish.

TRANIO:
'Tis well, sir, that you hunted for yourself:
'Tis thought your deer does hold you at a bay.

BAPTISTA:
O ho, Petruchio! Tranio hits you now.

LUCENTIO:
I thank thee for that gird, good Tranio.

HORTENSIO:
Confess, confess, hath he not hit you here?

PETRUCHIO:
A' has a little gall'd me, I confess;
And, as the jest did glance away from me,
'Tis ten to one it maim'd you two outright.

BAPTISTA:
Now, in good sadness, son Petruchio,
I think thou hast the veriest shrew of all.

PETRUCHIO:
Well, I say no: and therefore for assurance
Let's each one send unto his wife;
And he whose wife is most obedient
To come at first when he doth send for her,
Shall win the wager which we will propose.

HORTENSIO:
Content. What is the wager?

LUCENTIO:
Twenty crowns.

PETRUCHIO:
Twenty crowns!
I'll venture so much of my hawk or hound,
But twenty times so much upon my wife.

LUCENTIO:
A hundred then.

HORTENSIO:
Content.

PETRUCHIO:
A match! 'tis done.

HORTENSIO:
Who shall begin?

LUCENTIO:
That will I.
Go, Biondello, bid your mistress come to me.

BIONDELLO:
I go.

BAPTISTA:
Son, I'll be your half, Bianca comes.

LUCENTIO:
I'll have no halves; I'll bear it all myself.
How now! what news?

BIONDELLO:
Sir, my mistress sends you word
That she is busy and she cannot come.

PETRUCHIO:
How! she is busy and she cannot come!
Is that an answer?

GREMIO:
Ay, and a kind one too:
Pray God, sir, your wife send you not a worse.

PETRUCHIO:
I hope better.

HORTENSIO:
Sirrah Biondello, go and entreat my wife
To come to me forthwith.

PETRUCHIO:
O, ho! entreat her!
Nay, then she must needs come.

HORTENSIO:
I am afraid, sir,
Do what you can, yours will not be entreated.
Now, where's my wife?

BIONDELLO:
She says you have some goodly jest in hand:
She will not come: she bids you come to her.

PETRUCHIO:
Worse and worse; she will not come! O vile,
Intolerable, not to be endured!
Sirrah Grumio, go to your mistress;
Say, I command her to come to me.

HORTENSIO:
I know her answer.

PETRUCHIO:
What?

HORTENSIO:
She will not.

PETRUCHIO:
The fouler fortune mine, and there an end.

BAPTISTA:
Now, by my holidame, here comes Katharina!

KATHARINA:
What is your will, sir, that you send for me?

PETRUCHIO:
Where is your sister, and Hortensio's wife?

KATHARINA:
They sit conferring by the parlor fire.

PETRUCHIO:
Go fetch them hither: if they deny to come.
Swinge me them soundly forth unto their husbands:
Away, I say, and bring them hither straight.

LUCENTIO:
Here is a wonder, if you talk of a wonder.

HORTENSIO:
And so it is: I wonder what it bodes.

PETRUCHIO:
Marry, peace it bodes, and love and quiet life,
And awful rule and right supremacy;
And, to be short, what not, that's sweet and happy?

BAPTISTA:
Now, fair befal thee, good Petruchio!
The wager thou hast won; and I will add
Unto their losses twenty thousand crowns;
Another dowry to another daughter,
For she is changed, as she had never been.

PETRUCHIO:
Nay, I will win my wager better yet
And show more sign of her obedience,
Her new-built virtue and obedience.
See where she comes and brings your froward wives
As prisoners to her womanly persuasion.
Katharina, that cap of yours becomes you not:
Off with that bauble, throw it under-foot.

Widow:
Lord, let me never have a cause to sigh,
Till I be brought to such a silly pass!

BIANCA:
Fie! what a foolish duty call you this?

LUCENTIO:
I would your duty were as foolish too:
The wisdom of your duty, fair Bianca,
Hath cost me an hundred crowns since supper-time.

BIANCA:
The more fool you, for laying on my duty.

PETRUCHIO:
Katharina, I charge thee, tell these headstrong women
What duty they do owe their lords and husbands.

Widow:
Come, come, you're mocking: we will have no telling.

PETRUCHIO:
Come on, I say; and first begin with her.

Widow:
She shall not.

PETRUCHIO:
I say she shall: and first begin with her.

KATHARINA:
Fie, fie! unknit that threatening unkind brow,
And dart not scornful glances from those eyes,
To wound thy lord, thy king, thy governor:
It blots thy beauty as frosts do bite the meads,
Confounds thy fame as whirlwinds shake fair buds,
And in no sense is meet or amiable.
A woman moved is like a fountain troubled,
Muddy, ill-seeming, thick, bereft of beauty;
And while it is so, none so dry or thirsty
Will deign to sip or touch one drop of it.
Thy husband is thy lord, thy life, thy keeper,
Thy head, thy sovereign; one that cares for thee,
And for thy maintenance commits his body
To painful labour both by sea and land,
To watch the night in storms, the day in cold,
Whilst thou liest warm at home, secure and safe;
And craves no other tribute at thy hands
But love, fair looks and true obedience;
Too little payment for so great a debt.
Such duty as the subject owes the prince
Even such a woman oweth to her husband;
And when she is froward, peevish, sullen, sour,
And not obedient to his honest will,
What is she but a foul contending rebel
And graceless traitor to her loving lord?
I am ashamed that women are so simple
To offer war where they should kneel for peace;
Or seek for rule, supremacy and sway,
When they are bound to serve, love and obey.
Why are our bodies soft and weak and smooth,
Unapt to toil and trouble in the world,
But that our soft conditions and our hearts
Should well agree with our external parts?
Come, come, you froward and unable worms!
My mind hath been as big as one of yours,
My heart as great, my reason haply more,
To bandy word for word and frown for frown;
But now I see our lances are but straws,
Our strength as weak, our weakness past compare,
That seeming to be most which we indeed least are.
Then vail your stomachs, for it is no boot,
And place your hands below your husband's foot:
In token of which duty, if he please,
My hand is ready; may it do him ease.

PETRUCHIO:
Why, there's a wench! Come on, and kiss me, Kate.

LUCENTIO:
Well, go thy ways, old lad; for thou shalt ha't.

VINCENTIO:
'Tis a good hearing when children are toward.

LUCENTIO:
But a harsh hearing when women are froward.

PETRUCHIO:
Come, Kate, we'll to bed.
We three are married, but you two are sped.
'Twas I won the wager, though you hit the white;
And, being a winner, God give you good night!

HORTENSIO:
Now, go thy ways; thou hast tamed a curst shrew.

LUCENTIO:
'Tis a wonder, by your leave, she will be tamed so.

Master:
Boatswain!

Boatswain:
Here, master: what cheer?

Master:
Good, speak to the mariners: fall to't, yarely,
or we run ourselves aground: bestir, bestir.

Boatswain:
Heigh, my hearts! cheerly, cheerly, my hearts!
yare, yare! Take in the topsail. Tend to the
master's whistle. Blow, till thou burst thy wind,
if room enough!

ALONSO:
Good boatswain, have care. Where's the master?
Play the men.

Boatswain:
I pray now, keep below.

ANTONIO:
Where is the master, boatswain?

Boatswain:
Do you not hear him? You mar our labour: keep your
cabins: you do assist the storm.

GONZALO:
Nay, good, be patient.

Boatswain:
When the sea is. Hence! What cares these roarers
for the name of king? To cabin: silence! trouble us not.

GONZALO:
Good, yet remember whom thou hast aboard.

Boatswain:
None that I more love than myself. You are a
counsellor; if you can command these elements to
silence, and work the peace of the present, we will
not hand a rope more; use your authority: if you
cannot, give thanks you have lived so long, and make
yourself ready in your cabin for the mischance of
the hour, if it so hap. Cheerly, good hearts! Out
of our way, I say.

GONZALO:
I have great comfort from this fellow: methinks he
hath no drowning mark upon him; his complexion is
perfect gallows. Stand fast, good Fate, to his
hanging: make the rope of his destiny our cable,
for our own doth little advantage. If he be not
born to be hanged, our case is miserable.

Boatswain:
Down with the topmast! yare! lower, lower! Bring
her to try with main-course.
A plague upon this howling! they are louder than
the weather or our office.
Yet again! what do you here? Shall we give o'er
and drown? Have you a mind to sink?

SEBASTIAN:
A pox o' your throat, you bawling, blasphemous,
incharitable dog!

Boatswain:
Work you then.

ANTONIO:
Hang, cur! hang, you whoreson, insolent noisemaker!
We are less afraid to be drowned than thou art.

GONZALO:
I'll warrant him for drowning; though the ship were
no stronger than a nutshell and as leaky as an
unstanched wench.

Boatswain:
Lay her a-hold, a-hold! set her two courses off to
sea again; lay her off.

Mariners:
All lost! to prayers, to prayers! all lost!

Boatswain:
What, must our mouths be cold?

GONZALO:
The king and prince at prayers! let's assist them,
For our case is as theirs.

SEBASTIAN:
I'm out of patience.

ANTONIO:
We are merely cheated of our lives by drunkards:
This wide-chapp'd rascal--would thou mightst lie drowning
The washing of ten tides!

GONZALO:
He'll be hang'd yet,
Though every drop of water swear against it
And gape at widest to glut him.

ANTONIO:
Let's all sink with the king.

SEBASTIAN:
Let's take leave of him.

GONZALO:
Now would I give a thousand furlongs of sea for an
acre of barren ground, long heath, brown furze, any
thing. The wills above be done! but I would fain
die a dry death.

MIRANDA:
If by your art, my dearest father, you have
Put the wild waters in this roar, allay them.
The sky, it seems, would pour down stinking pitch,
But that the sea, mounting to the welkin's cheek,
Dashes the fire out. O, I have suffered
With those that I saw suffer: a brave vessel,
Who had, no doubt, some noble creature in her,
Dash'd all to pieces. O, the cry did knock
Against my very heart. Poor souls, they perish'd.
Had I been any god of power, I would
Have sunk the sea within the earth or ere
It should the good ship so have swallow'd and
The fraughting souls within her.

PROSPERO:
Be collected:
No more amazement: tell your piteous heart
There's no harm done.

MIRANDA:
O, woe the day!

PROSPERO:
No harm.
I have done nothing but in care of thee,
Of thee, my dear one, thee, my daughter, who
Art ignorant of what thou art, nought knowing
Of whence I am, nor that I am more better
Than Prospero, master of a full poor cell,
And thy no greater father.

MIRANDA:
More to know
Did never meddle with my thoughts.

PROSPERO:
'Tis time
I should inform thee farther. Lend thy hand,
And pluck my magic garment from me. So:
Lie there, my art. Wipe thou thine eyes; have comfort.
The direful spectacle of the wreck, which touch'd
The very virtue of compassion in thee,
I have with such provision in mine art
So safely ordered that there is no soul--
No, not so much perdition as an hair
Betid to any creature in the vessel
Which thou heard'st cry, which thou saw'st sink. Sit down;
For thou must now know farther.

MIRANDA:
You have often
Begun to tell me what I am, but stopp'd
And left me to a bootless inquisition,
Concluding 'Stay: not yet.'

PROSPERO:
The hour's now come;
The very minute bids thee ope thine ear;
Obey and be attentive. Canst thou remember
A time before we came unto this cell?
I do not think thou canst, for then thou wast not
Out three years old.

MIRANDA:
Certainly, sir, I can.

PROSPERO:
By what? by any other house or person?
Of any thing the image tell me that
Hath kept with thy remembrance.

MIRANDA:
'Tis far off
And rather like a dream than an assurance
That my remembrance warrants. Had I not
Four or five women once that tended me?

PROSPERO:
Thou hadst, and more, Miranda. But how is it
That this lives in thy mind? What seest thou else
In the dark backward and abysm of time?
If thou remember'st aught ere thou camest here,
How thou camest here thou mayst.

MIRANDA:
But that I do not.

PROSPERO:
Twelve year since, Miranda, twelve year since,
Thy father was the Duke of Milan and
A prince of power.

MIRANDA:
Sir, are not you my father?

PROSPERO:
Thy mother was a piece of virtue, and
She said thou wast my daughter; and thy father
Was Duke of Milan; and thou his only heir
And princess no worse issued.

MIRANDA:
O the heavens!
What foul play had we, that we came from thence?
Or blessed was't we did?

PROSPERO:
Both, both, my girl:
By foul play, as thou say'st, were we heaved thence,
But blessedly holp hither.

MIRANDA:
O, my heart bleeds
To think o' the teen that I have turn'd you to,
Which is from my remembrance! Please you, farther.

PROSPERO:
My brother and thy uncle, call'd Antonio--
I pray thee, mark me--that a brother should
Be so perfidious!--he whom next thyself
Of all the world I loved and to him put
The manage of my state; as at that time
Through all the signories it was the first
And Prospero the prime duke, being so reputed
In dignity, and for the liberal arts
Without a parallel; those being all my study,
The government I cast upon my brother
And to my state grew stranger, being transported
And rapt in secret studies. Thy false uncle--
Dost thou attend me?

MIRANDA:
Sir, most heedfully.

PROSPERO:
Being once perfected how to grant suits,
How to deny them, who to advance and who
To trash for over-topping, new created
The creatures that were mine, I say, or changed 'em,
Or else new form'd 'em; having both the key
Of officer and office, set all hearts i' the state
To what tune pleased his ear; that now he was
The ivy which had hid my princely trunk,
And suck'd my verdure out on't. Thou attend'st not.

MIRANDA:
O, good sir, I do.

PROSPERO:
I pray thee, mark me.
I, thus neglecting worldly ends, all dedicated
To closeness and the bettering of my mind
With that which, but by being so retired,
O'er-prized all popular rate, in my false brother
Awaked an evil nature; and my trust,
Like a good parent, did beget of him
A falsehood in its contrary as great
As my trust was; which had indeed no limit,
A confidence sans bound. He being thus lorded,
Not only with what my revenue yielded,
But what my power might else exact, like one
Who having into truth, by telling of it,
Made such a sinner of his memory,
To credit his own lie, he did believe
He was indeed the duke; out o' the substitution
And executing the outward face of royalty,
With all prerogative: hence his ambition growing--
Dost thou hear?

MIRANDA:
Your tale, sir, would cure deafness.

PROSPERO:
To have no screen between this part he play'd
And him he play'd it for, he needs will be
Absolute Milan. Me, poor man, my library
Was dukedom large enough: of temporal royalties
He thinks me now incapable; confederates--
So dry he was for sway--wi' the King of Naples
To give him annual tribute, do him homage,
Subject his coronet to his crown and bend
The dukedom yet unbow'd--alas, poor Milan!--
To most ignoble stooping.

MIRANDA:
O the heavens!

PROSPERO:
Mark his condition and the event; then tell me
If this might be a brother.

MIRANDA:
I should sin
To think but nobly of my grandmother:
Good wombs have borne bad sons.

PROSPERO:
Now the condition.
The King of Naples, being an enemy
To me inveterate, hearkens my brother's suit;
Which was, that he, in lieu o' the premises
Of homage and I know not how much tribute,
Should presently extirpate me and mine
Out of the dukedom and confer fair Milan
With all the honours on my brother: whereon,
A treacherous army levied, one midnight
Fated to the purpose did Antonio open
The gates of Milan, and, i' the dead of darkness,
The ministers for the purpose hurried thence
Me and thy crying self.

MIRANDA:
Alack, for pity!
I, not remembering how I cried out then,
Will cry it o'er again: it is a hint
That wrings mine eyes to't.

PROSPERO:
Hear a little further
And then I'll bring thee to the present business
Which now's upon's; without the which this story
Were most impertinent.

MIRANDA:
Wherefore did they not
That hour destroy us?

PROSPERO:
Well demanded, wench:
My tale provokes that question. Dear, they durst not,
So dear the love my people bore me, nor set
A mark so bloody on the business, but
With colours fairer painted their foul ends.
In few, they hurried us aboard a bark,
Bore us some leagues to sea; where they prepared
A rotten carcass of a boat, not rigg'd,
Nor tackle, sail, nor mast; the very rats
Instinctively had quit it: there they hoist us,
To cry to the sea that roar'd to us, to sigh
To the winds whose pity, sighing back again,
Did us but loving wrong.

MIRANDA:
Alack, what trouble
Was I then to you!

PROSPERO:
O, a cherubim
Thou wast that did preserve me. Thou didst smile.
Infused with a fortitude from heaven,
When I have deck'd the sea with drops full salt,
Under my burthen groan'd; which raised in me
An undergoing stomach, to bear up
Against what should ensue.

MIRANDA:
How came we ashore?

PROSPERO:
By Providence divine.
Some food we had and some fresh water that
A noble Neapolitan, Gonzalo,
Out of his charity, being then appointed
Master of this design, did give us, with
Rich garments, linens, stuffs and necessaries,
Which since have steaded much; so, of his gentleness,
Knowing I loved my books, he furnish'd me
From mine own library with volumes that
I prize above my dukedom.

MIRANDA:
Would I might
But ever see that man!

PROSPERO:
Now I arise:
Sit still, and hear the last of our sea-sorrow.
Here in this island we arrived; and here
Have I, thy schoolmaster, made thee more profit
Than other princesses can that have more time
For vainer hours and tutors not so careful.

MIRANDA:
Heavens thank you for't! And now, I pray you, sir,
For still 'tis beating in my mind, your reason
For raising this sea-storm?

PROSPERO:
Know thus far forth.
By accident most strange, bountiful Fortune,
Now my dear lady, hath mine enemies
Brought to this shore; and by my prescience
I find my zenith doth depend upon
A most auspicious star, whose influence
If now I court not but omit, my fortunes
Will ever after droop. Here cease more questions:
Thou art inclined to sleep; 'tis a good dulness,
And give it way: I know thou canst not choose.
Come away, servant, come. I am ready now.
Approach, my Ariel, come.

ARIEL:
All hail, great master! grave sir, hail! I come
To answer thy best pleasure; be't to fly,
To swim, to dive into the fire, to ride
On the curl'd clouds, to thy strong bidding task
Ariel and all his quality.

PROSPERO:
Hast thou, spirit,
Perform'd to point the tempest that I bade thee?

ARIEL:
To every article.
I boarded the king's ship; now on the beak,
Now in the waist, the deck, in every cabin,
I flamed amazement: sometime I'ld divide,
And burn in many places; on the topmast,
The yards and bowsprit, would I flame distinctly,
Then meet and join. Jove's lightnings, the precursors
O' the dreadful thunder-claps, more momentary
And sight-outrunning were not; the fire and cracks
Of sulphurous roaring the most mighty Neptune
Seem to besiege and make his bold waves tremble,
Yea, his dread trident shake.

PROSPERO:
My brave spirit!
Who was so firm, so constant, that this coil
Would not infect his reason?

ARIEL:
Not a soul
But felt a fever of the mad and play'd
Some tricks of desperation. All but mariners
Plunged in the foaming brine and quit the vessel,
Then all afire with me: the king's son, Ferdinand,
With hair up-staring,--then like reeds, not hair,--
Was the first man that leap'd; cried, 'Hell is empty
And all the devils are here.'

PROSPERO:
Why that's my spirit!
But was not this nigh shore?

ARIEL:
Close by, my master.

PROSPERO:
But are they, Ariel, safe?

ARIEL:
Not a hair perish'd;
On their sustaining garments not a blemish,
But fresher than before: and, as thou badest me,
In troops I have dispersed them 'bout the isle.
The king's son have I landed by himself;
Whom I left cooling of the air with sighs
In an odd angle of the isle and sitting,
His arms in this sad knot.

PROSPERO:
Of the king's ship
The mariners say how thou hast disposed
And all the rest o' the fleet.

ARIEL:
Safely in harbour
Is the king's ship; in the deep nook, where once
Thou call'dst me up at midnight to fetch dew
From the still-vex'd Bermoothes, there she's hid:
The mariners all under hatches stow'd;
Who, with a charm join'd to their suffer'd labour,
I have left asleep; and for the rest o' the fleet
Which I dispersed, they all have met again
And are upon the Mediterranean flote,
Bound sadly home for Naples,
Supposing that they saw the king's ship wreck'd
And his great person perish.

PROSPERO:
Ariel, thy charge
Exactly is perform'd: but there's more work.
What is the time o' the day?

ARIEL:
Past the mid season.

PROSPERO:
At least two glasses. The time 'twixt six and now
Must by us both be spent most preciously.

ARIEL:
Is there more toil? Since thou dost give me pains,
Let me remember thee what thou hast promised,
Which is not yet perform'd me.

PROSPERO:
How now? moody?
What is't thou canst demand?

ARIEL:
My liberty.

PROSPERO:
Before the time be out? no more!

ARIEL:
I prithee,
Remember I have done thee worthy service;
Told thee no lies, made thee no mistakings, served
Without or grudge or grumblings: thou didst promise
To bate me a full year.

PROSPERO:
Dost thou forget
From what a torment I did free thee?

ARIEL:
No.

PROSPERO:
Thou dost, and think'st it much to tread the ooze
Of the salt deep,
To run upon the sharp wind of the north,
To do me business in the veins o' the earth
When it is baked with frost.

ARIEL:
I do not, sir.

PROSPERO:
Thou liest, malignant thing! Hast thou forgot
The foul witch Sycorax, who with age and envy
Was grown into a hoop? hast thou forgot her?

ARIEL:
No, sir.

PROSPERO:
Thou hast. Where was she born? speak; tell me.

ARIEL:
Sir, in Argier.

PROSPERO:
O, was she so? I must
Once in a month recount what thou hast been,
Which thou forget'st. This damn'd witch Sycorax,
For mischiefs manifold and sorceries terrible
To enter human hearing, from Argier,
Thou know'st, was banish'd: for one thing she did
They would not take her life. Is not this true?

ARIEL:
Ay, sir.

PROSPERO:
This blue-eyed hag was hither brought with child
And here was left by the sailors. Thou, my slave,
As thou report'st thyself, wast then her servant;
And, for thou wast a spirit too delicate
To act her earthy and abhorr'd commands,
Refusing her grand hests, she did confine thee,
By help of her more potent ministers
And in her most unmitigable rage,
Into a cloven pine; within which rift
Imprison'd thou didst painfully remain
A dozen years; within which space she died
And left thee there; where thou didst vent thy groans
As fast as mill-wheels strike. Then was this island--
Save for the son that she did litter here,
A freckled whelp hag-born--not honour'd with
A human shape.

ARIEL:
Yes, Caliban her son.

PROSPERO:
Dull thing, I say so; he, that Caliban
Whom now I keep in service. Thou best know'st
What torment I did find thee in; thy groans
Did make wolves howl and penetrate the breasts
Of ever angry bears: it was a torment
To lay upon the damn'd, which Sycorax
Could not again undo: it was mine art,
When I arrived and heard thee, that made gape
The pine and let thee out.

ARIEL:
I thank thee, master.

PROSPERO:
If thou more murmur'st, I will rend an oak
And peg thee in his knotty entrails till
Thou hast howl'd away twelve winters.

ARIEL:
Pardon, master;
I will be correspondent to command
And do my spiriting gently.

PROSPERO:
Do so, and after two days
I will discharge thee.

ARIEL:
That's my noble master!
What shall I do? say what; what shall I do?

PROSPERO:
Go make thyself like a nymph o' the sea: be subject
To no sight but thine and mine, invisible
To every eyeball else. Go take this shape
And hither come in't: go, hence with diligence!
Awake, dear heart, awake! thou hast slept well; Awake!

MIRANDA:
The strangeness of your story put
Heaviness in me.

PROSPERO:
Shake it off. Come on;
We'll visit Caliban my slave, who never
Yields us kind answer.

MIRANDA:
'Tis a villain, sir,
I do not love to look on.

PROSPERO:
But, as 'tis,
We cannot miss him: he does make our fire,
Fetch in our wood and serves in offices
That profit us. What, ho! slave! Caliban!
Thou earth, thou! speak.

CALIBAN:

PROSPERO:
Come forth, I say! there's other business for thee:
Come, thou tortoise! when?
Fine apparition! My quaint Ariel,
Hark in thine ear.

ARIEL:
My lord it shall be done.

PROSPERO:
Thou poisonous slave, got by the devil himself
Upon thy wicked dam, come forth!

CALIBAN:
As wicked dew as e'er my mother brush'd
With raven's feather from unwholesome fen
Drop on you both! a south-west blow on ye
And blister you all o'er!

PROSPERO:
For this, be sure, to-night thou shalt have cramps,
Side-stitches that shall pen thy breath up; urchins
Shall, for that vast of night that they may work,
All exercise on thee; thou shalt be pinch'd
As thick as honeycomb, each pinch more stinging
Than bees that made 'em.

CALIBAN:
I must eat my dinner.
This island's mine, by Sycorax my mother,
Which thou takest from me. When thou camest first,
Thou strokedst me and madest much of me, wouldst give me
Water with berries in't, and teach me how
To name the bigger light, and how the less,
That burn by day and night: and then I loved thee
And show'd thee all the qualities o' the isle,
The fresh springs, brine-pits, barren place and fertile:
Cursed be I that did so! All the charms
Of Sycorax, toads, beetles, bats, light on you!
For I am all the subjects that you have,
Which first was mine own king: and here you sty me
In this hard rock, whiles you do keep from me
The rest o' the island.

PROSPERO:
Thou most lying slave,
Whom stripes may move, not kindness! I have used thee,
Filth as thou art, with human care, and lodged thee
In mine own cell, till thou didst seek to violate
The honour of my child.

CALIBAN:
O ho, O ho! would't had been done!
Thou didst prevent me; I had peopled else
This isle with Calibans.

PROSPERO:
Abhorred slave,
Which any print of goodness wilt not take,
Being capable of all ill! I pitied thee,
Took pains to make thee speak, taught thee each hour
One thing or other: when thou didst not, savage,
Know thine own meaning, but wouldst gabble like
A thing most brutish, I endow'd thy purposes
With words that made them known. But thy vile race,
Though thou didst learn, had that in't which
good natures
Could not abide to be with; therefore wast thou
Deservedly confined into this rock,
Who hadst deserved more than a prison.

CALIBAN:
You taught me language; and my profit on't
Is, I know how to curse. The red plague rid you
For learning me your language!

PROSPERO:
Hag-seed, hence!
Fetch us in fuel; and be quick, thou'rt best,
To answer other business. Shrug'st thou, malice?
If thou neglect'st or dost unwillingly
What I command, I'll rack thee with old cramps,
Fill all thy bones with aches, make thee roar
That beasts shall tremble at thy din.

CALIBAN:
No, pray thee.
I must obey: his art is of such power,
It would control my dam's god, Setebos,
and make a vassal of him.

PROSPERO:
So, slave; hence!
Come unto these yellow sands,
And then take hands:
Courtsied when you have and kiss'd
The wild waves whist,
Foot it featly here and there;
And, sweet sprites, the burthen bear.
Hark, hark!

FERDINAND:
Where should this music be? i' the air or the earth?
It sounds no more: and sure, it waits upon
Some god o' the island. Sitting on a bank,
Weeping again the king my father's wreck,
This music crept by me upon the waters,
Allaying both their fury and my passion
With its sweet air: thence I have follow'd it,
Or it hath drawn me rather. But 'tis gone.
No, it begins again.
Full fathom five thy father lies;
Of his bones are coral made;
Those are pearls that were his eyes:
Nothing of him that doth fade
But doth suffer a sea-change
Into something rich and strange.
Sea-nymphs hourly ring his knell
Hark! now I hear them,--Ding-dong, bell.

FERDINAND:
The ditty does remember my drown'd father.
This is no mortal business, nor no sound
That the earth owes. I hear it now above me.

PROSPERO:
The fringed curtains of thine eye advance
And say what thou seest yond.

MIRANDA:
What is't? a spirit?
Lord, how it looks about! Believe me, sir,
It carries a brave form. But 'tis a spirit.

PROSPERO:
No, wench; it eats and sleeps and hath such senses
As we have, such. This gallant which thou seest
Was in the wreck; and, but he's something stain'd
With grief that's beauty's canker, thou mightst call him
A goodly person: he hath lost his fellows
And strays about to find 'em.

MIRANDA:
I might call him
A thing divine, for nothing natural
I ever saw so noble.

PROSPERO:

FERDINAND:
Most sure, the goddess
On whom these airs attend! Vouchsafe my prayer
May know if you remain upon this island;
And that you will some good instruction give
How I may bear me here: my prime request,
Which I do last pronounce, is, O you wonder!
If you be maid or no?

MIRANDA:
No wonder, sir;
But certainly a maid.

FERDINAND:
My language! heavens!
I am the best of them that speak this speech,
Were I but where 'tis spoken.

PROSPERO:
How? the best?
What wert thou, if the King of Naples heard thee?

FERDINAND:
A single thing, as I am now, that wonders
To hear thee speak of Naples. He does hear me;
And that he does I weep: myself am Naples,
Who with mine eyes, never since at ebb, beheld
The king my father wreck'd.

MIRANDA:
Alack, for mercy!

FERDINAND:
Yes, faith, and all his lords; the Duke of Milan
And his brave son being twain.

PROSPERO:

MIRANDA:
Why speaks my father so ungently? This
Is the third man that e'er I saw, the first
That e'er I sigh'd for: pity move my father
To be inclined my way!

FERDINAND:
O, if a virgin,
And your affection not gone forth, I'll make you
The queen of Naples.

PROSPERO:
Soft, sir! one word more.
They are both in either's powers; but this swift business
I must uneasy make, lest too light winning
Make the prize light.
One word more; I charge thee
That thou attend me: thou dost here usurp
The name thou owest not; and hast put thyself
Upon this island as a spy, to win it
From me, the lord on't.

FERDINAND:
No, as I am a man.

MIRANDA:
There's nothing ill can dwell in such a temple:
If the ill spirit have so fair a house,
Good things will strive to dwell with't.

PROSPERO:
Follow me.
Speak not you for him; he's a traitor. Come;
I'll manacle thy neck and feet together:
Sea-water shalt thou drink; thy food shall be
The fresh-brook muscles, wither'd roots and husks
Wherein the acorn cradled. Follow.

FERDINAND:
No;
I will resist such entertainment till
Mine enemy has more power.

MIRANDA:
O dear father,
Make not too rash a trial of him, for
He's gentle and not fearful.

PROSPERO:
What? I say,
My foot my tutor? Put thy sword up, traitor;
Who makest a show but darest not strike, thy conscience
Is so possess'd with guilt: come from thy ward,
For I can here disarm thee with this stick
And make thy weapon drop.

MIRANDA:
Beseech you, father.

PROSPERO:
Hence! hang not on my garments.

MIRANDA:
Sir, have pity;
I'll be his surety.

PROSPERO:
Silence! one word more
Shall make me chide thee, if not hate thee. What!
An advocate for an imposter! hush!
Thou think'st there is no more such shapes as he,
Having seen but him and Caliban: foolish wench!
To the most of men this is a Caliban
And they to him are angels.

MIRANDA:
My affections
Are then most humble; I have no ambition
To see a goodlier man.

PROSPERO:
Come on; obey:
Thy nerves are in their infancy again
And have no vigour in them.

FERDINAND:
So they are;
My spirits, as in a dream, are all bound up.
My father's loss, the weakness which I feel,
The wreck of all my friends, nor this man's threats,
To whom I am subdued, are but light to me,
Might I but through my prison once a day
Behold this maid: all corners else o' the earth
Let liberty make use of; space enough
Have I in such a prison.

PROSPERO:

MIRANDA:
Be of comfort;
My father's of a better nature, sir,
Than he appears by speech: this is unwonted
Which now came from him.

PROSPERO:
Thou shalt be free
As mountain winds: but then exactly do
All points of my command.

ARIEL:
To the syllable.

PROSPERO:
Come, follow. Speak not for him.

GONZALO:
Beseech you, sir, be merry; you have cause,
So have we all, of joy; for our escape
Is much beyond our loss. Our hint of woe
Is common; every day some sailor's wife,
The masters of some merchant and the merchant
Have just our theme of woe; but for the miracle,
I mean our preservation, few in millions
Can speak like us: then wisely, good sir, weigh
Our sorrow with our comfort.

ALONSO:
Prithee, peace.

SEBASTIAN:
He receives comfort like cold porridge.

ANTONIO:
The visitor will not give him o'er so.

SEBASTIAN:
Look he's winding up the watch of his wit;
by and by it will strike.

GONZALO:
Sir,--

SEBASTIAN:
One: tell.

GONZALO:
When every grief is entertain'd that's offer'd,
Comes to the entertainer--

SEBASTIAN:
A dollar.

GONZALO:
Dolour comes to him, indeed: you
have spoken truer than you purposed.

SEBASTIAN:
You have taken it wiselier than I meant you should.

GONZALO:
Therefore, my lord,--

ANTONIO:
Fie, what a spendthrift is he of his tongue!

ALONSO:
I prithee, spare.

GONZALO:
Well, I have done: but yet,--

SEBASTIAN:
He will be talking.

ANTONIO:
Which, of he or Adrian, for a good
wager, first begins to crow?

SEBASTIAN:
The old cock.

ANTONIO:
The cockerel.

SEBASTIAN:
Done. The wager?

ANTONIO:
A laughter.

SEBASTIAN:
A match!

ADRIAN:
Though this island seem to be desert,--

SEBASTIAN:
Ha, ha, ha! So, you're paid.

ADRIAN:
Uninhabitable and almost inaccessible,--

SEBASTIAN:
Yet,--

ADRIAN:
Yet,--

ANTONIO:
He could not miss't.

ADRIAN:
It must needs be of subtle, tender and delicate
temperance.

ANTONIO:
Temperance was a delicate wench.

SEBASTIAN:
Ay, and a subtle; as he most learnedly delivered.

ADRIAN:
The air breathes upon us here most sweetly.

SEBASTIAN:
As if it had lungs and rotten ones.

ANTONIO:
Or as 'twere perfumed by a fen.

GONZALO:
Here is everything advantageous to life.

ANTONIO:
True; save means to live.

SEBASTIAN:
Of that there's none, or little.

GONZALO:
How lush and lusty the grass looks! how green!

ANTONIO:
The ground indeed is tawny.

SEBASTIAN:
With an eye of green in't.

ANTONIO:
He misses not much.

SEBASTIAN:
No; he doth but mistake the truth totally.

GONZALO:
But the rarity of it is,--which is indeed almost
beyond credit,--

SEBASTIAN:
As many vouched rarities are.

GONZALO:
That our garments, being, as they were, drenched in
the sea, hold notwithstanding their freshness and
glosses, being rather new-dyed than stained with
salt water.

ANTONIO:
If but one of his pockets could speak, would it not
say he lies?

SEBASTIAN:
Ay, or very falsely pocket up his report

GONZALO:
Methinks our garments are now as fresh as when we
put them on first in Afric, at the marriage of
the king's fair daughter Claribel to the King of Tunis.

SEBASTIAN:
'Twas a sweet marriage, and we prosper well in our return.

ADRIAN:
Tunis was never graced before with such a paragon to
their queen.

GONZALO:
Not since widow Dido's time.

ANTONIO:
Widow! a pox o' that! How came that widow in?
widow Dido!

SEBASTIAN:
What if he had said 'widower AEneas' too? Good Lord,
how you take it!

ADRIAN:
'Widow Dido' said you? you make me study of that:
she was of Carthage, not of Tunis.

GONZALO:
This Tunis, sir, was Carthage.

ADRIAN:
Carthage?

GONZALO:
I assure you, Carthage.

SEBASTIAN:
His word is more than the miraculous harp; he hath
raised the wall and houses too.

ANTONIO:
What impossible matter will he make easy next?

SEBASTIAN:
I think he will carry this island home in his pocket
and give it his son for an apple.

ANTONIO:
And, sowing the kernels of it in the sea, bring
forth more islands.

GONZALO:
Ay.

ANTONIO:
Why, in good time.

GONZALO:
Sir, we were talking that our garments seem now
as fresh as when we were at Tunis at the marriage
of your daughter, who is now queen.

ANTONIO:
And the rarest that e'er came there.

SEBASTIAN:
Bate, I beseech you, widow Dido.

ANTONIO:
O, widow Dido! ay, widow Dido.

GONZALO:
Is not, sir, my doublet as fresh as the first day I
wore it? I mean, in a sort.

ANTONIO:
That sort was well fished for.

GONZALO:
When I wore it at your daughter's marriage?

ALONSO:
You cram these words into mine ears against
The stomach of my sense. Would I had never
Married my daughter there! for, coming thence,
My son is lost and, in my rate, she too,
Who is so far from Italy removed
I ne'er again shall see her. O thou mine heir
Of Naples and of Milan, what strange fish
Hath made his meal on thee?

FRANCISCO:
Sir, he may live:
I saw him beat the surges under him,
And ride upon their backs; he trod the water,
Whose enmity he flung aside, and breasted
The surge most swoln that met him; his bold head
'Bove the contentious waves he kept, and oar'd
Himself with his good arms in lusty stroke
To the shore, that o'er his wave-worn basis bow'd,
As stooping to relieve him: I not doubt
He came alive to land.

ALONSO:
No, no, he's gone.

SEBASTIAN:
Sir, you may thank yourself for this great loss,
That would not bless our Europe with your daughter,
But rather lose her to an African;
Where she at least is banish'd from your eye,
Who hath cause to wet the grief on't.

ALONSO:
Prithee, peace.

SEBASTIAN:
You were kneel'd to and importuned otherwise
By all of us, and the fair soul herself
Weigh'd between loathness and obedience, at
Which end o' the beam should bow. We have lost your
son,
I fear, for ever: Milan and Naples have
More widows in them of this business' making
Than we bring men to comfort them:
The fault's your own.

ALONSO:
So is the dear'st o' the loss.

GONZALO:
My lord Sebastian,
The truth you speak doth lack some gentleness
And time to speak it in: you rub the sore,
When you should bring the plaster.

SEBASTIAN:
Very well.

ANTONIO:
And most chirurgeonly.

GONZALO:
It is foul weather in us all, good sir,
When you are cloudy.

SEBASTIAN:
Foul weather?

ANTONIO:
Very foul.

GONZALO:
Had I plantation of this isle, my lord,--

ANTONIO:
He'ld sow't with nettle-seed.

SEBASTIAN:
Or docks, or mallows.

GONZALO:
And were the king on't, what would I do?

SEBASTIAN:
'Scape being drunk for want of wine.

GONZALO:
I' the commonwealth I would by contraries
Execute all things; for no kind of traffic
Would I admit; no name of magistrate;
Letters should not be known; riches, poverty,
And use of service, none; contract, succession,
Bourn, bound of land, tilth, vineyard, none;
No use of metal, corn, or wine, or oil;
No occupation; all men idle, all;
And women too, but innocent and pure;
No sovereignty;--

SEBASTIAN:
Yet he would be king on't.

ANTONIO:
The latter end of his commonwealth forgets the
beginning.

GONZALO:
All things in common nature should produce
Without sweat or endeavour: treason, felony,
Sword, pike, knife, gun, or need of any engine,
Would I not have; but nature should bring forth,
Of its own kind, all foison, all abundance,
To feed my innocent people.

SEBASTIAN:
No marrying 'mong his subjects?

ANTONIO:
None, man; all idle: whores and knaves.

GONZALO:
I would with such perfection govern, sir,
To excel the golden age.

SEBASTIAN:
God save his majesty!

ANTONIO:
Long live Gonzalo!

GONZALO:
And,--do you mark me, sir?

ALONSO:
Prithee, no more: thou dost talk nothing to me.

GONZALO:
I do well believe your highness; and
did it to minister occasion to these gentlemen,
who are of such sensible and nimble lungs that
they always use to laugh at nothing.

ANTONIO:
'Twas you we laughed at.

GONZALO:
Who in this kind of merry fooling am nothing
to you: so you may continue and laugh at
nothing still.

ANTONIO:
What a blow was there given!

SEBASTIAN:
An it had not fallen flat-long.

GONZALO:
You are gentlemen of brave metal; you would lift
the moon out of her sphere, if she would continue
in it five weeks without changing.

SEBASTIAN:
We would so, and then go a bat-fowling.

ANTONIO:
Nay, good my lord, be not angry.

GONZALO:
No, I warrant you; I will not adventure
my discretion so weakly. Will you laugh
me asleep, for I am very heavy?

ANTONIO:
Go sleep, and hear us.

ALONSO:
What, all so soon asleep! I wish mine eyes
Would, with themselves, shut up my thoughts: I find
They are inclined to do so.

SEBASTIAN:
Please you, sir,
Do not omit the heavy offer of it:
It seldom visits sorrow; when it doth,
It is a comforter.

ANTONIO:
We two, my lord,
Will guard your person while you take your rest,
And watch your safety.

ALONSO:
Thank you. Wondrous heavy.

SEBASTIAN:
What a strange drowsiness possesses them!

ANTONIO:
It is the quality o' the climate.

SEBASTIAN:
Why
Doth it not then our eyelids sink? I find not
Myself disposed to sleep.

ANTONIO:
Nor I; my spirits are nimble.
They fell together all, as by consent;
They dropp'd, as by a thunder-stroke. What might,
Worthy Sebastian? O, what might?--No more:--
And yet me thinks I see it in thy face,
What thou shouldst be: the occasion speaks thee, and
My strong imagination sees a crown
Dropping upon thy head.

SEBASTIAN:
What, art thou waking?

ANTONIO:
Do you not hear me speak?

SEBASTIAN:
I do; and surely
It is a sleepy language and thou speak'st
Out of thy sleep. What is it thou didst say?
This is a strange repose, to be asleep
With eyes wide open; standing, speaking, moving,
And yet so fast asleep.

ANTONIO:
Noble Sebastian,
Thou let'st thy fortune sleep--die, rather; wink'st
Whiles thou art waking.


--- End of file: shakespear_20.txt ---

